The opinion of Imam al-Shatibi

He, may Allah have mercy on him, said in al-I'tisam(272): "The essence of the unregulated interests (masalih mursala) returns to preserving a necessary matter and alleviating a necessary hardship in religion. Also, its reference is to preserving the necessary from the perspective of 'what is not completed without it...' Thus, it is a means and not an objective, and its return to alleviating hardship pertains to easing, not tightening." So, the statement of Imam al-Shatibi: "a means" clarifies what we have stated, and his statement: "not an objective" is a response to anyone who claims that the existence of something as an interest is evidence of its permissibility. For the objectives are the results of actions, and the ruling of actions is from the Sharia, but the means to the action is what is taken based on the unregulated interest.

Al-Shatibi believes that the inference from interest regarding a means should be in the case of the absence of a text on that means, and the absence of analogy (qiyas) as well. He said(273): "The unregulated interests refer to considering the appropriate that does not have a specific origin supporting it, so it does not have a specific legal witness, nor is it an analogy such that if presented to minds, it would be accepted." Here, the importance of his statement "specific legal witness" appears, meaning that this means or method does not have a specific text, otherwise it would not fall under the unregulated interests, and also that there is no analogy indicating that means or method. He also said(274): "As for it being in the necessary matters as a means and 'what is not completed without it,' if it is stipulated, then it is a legal condition, and thus it has no place in this regard, because the text of the legislator has relieved us from considering it. If it is not stipulated, then it is either rational or customary, and it is not necessary for it to be legal. Likewise, it is not necessary for it to be in a known manner." Thus, it becomes clear from what he said that the unregulated interest is a means or method.
__________
(272) Al-I'tisam, vol. 2, p. 78.
(273) Al-I'tisam, vol. 2, p. 65.
(274) Al-I'tisam, vol. 2, p. 78.
