And to further emphasize and clarify, consider his statement in the same text(277): "Just as if we were to assume the existence of the public interest (maslaha) of the supreme imamate without an imam, on the condition that there is no text regarding it, that would be valid, as would other necessary interests." He believes that the premise of the existence of a caliph is indicated by the text, and it is supported by the principle that what is necessary for the fulfillment of an obligation is itself an obligation. As for the principle, it is because Islam cannot be implemented without a caliph, and since implementing Islam is an obligation, the existence of a caliph is also an obligation. Al-Shatibi's view is that if there were no text on the obligation of the caliphate, the obligation would be to implement Islam and to implement any necessary matter for it. If the implementation of Islam were possible without the existence of a caliph, that is, through another means, then what is required by Sharia according to the principle (what is necessary for the fulfillment of an obligation...) would be one of two things: either the existence of a caliph or that means, and then the appointment of a caliph or that means would be a public interest (maslaha mursala). This is in the case where there is no text on the imamate.
Al-Shatibi does not see that the public interest is what is determined by reason; rather, the public interest is the action commanded by the legislator. If we know that an action is commanded by the legislator, we then know that it is a public interest, and likewise, we know that what leads to it is also a public interest. The same applies to corruption (mafsada); the public interest is what the Sharia has deemed to be a public interest, not what the intellect, desires, or self inclines towards. He says: "The public interests established by Sharia and the evils repelled are only considered in terms of how this life supports the afterlife, not in terms of the whims of souls in seeking their ordinary interests or repelling their ordinary evils." He supports this with several points, of which I will mention one. He says: "The Sharia has come to free the obligated from the inclinations of their desires so that they may be servants of Allah. This meaning, if established, cannot coexist with the assumption that the establishment of Sharia is in accordance with the whims of souls and the pursuit of their immediate benefits, whatever they may be. And our Lord, Exalted is He, said: {And if the truth had followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and whoever is in them would have been corrupted}(278).
__________
(277) Al-I'tisam, vol. 2, p. 78.
(278) Refer to Ruh al-Ma'ani by al-Alusi and see the rest of the verse.
