From Abu Bakr to Umar (may Allah be pleased with them), there was no prior command or precedent in this matter, and likewise, the caliphate was left to consultation (shura), the recording of accounts (dawawin), the minting of currency for the Muslims, and the establishment of prisons were actions taken by Umar (may Allah be pleased with him). The demolition of the endowments (awqaf) adjacent to the Mosque of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) and the expansion of the mosque when it became cramped was done by Uthman (may Allah be pleased with him). The renewal of the call to prayer (adhan) on Friday in the marketplace, which is the first adhan, was also done by Uthman (may Allah be pleased with him), and this is very much in line with absolute public interest (maslaha). The Imam of the Two Holy Sanctuaries (Imam al-Haramayn) has addressed matters in his book titled al-Ghayathi, permitting them and issuing fatwas on them, while the Malikis have distanced themselves from them and have bridged over them, stating them for absolute public interest. Likewise, al-Ghazali in al-Shifa al-Ghalil, although both of them strongly denied our stance on public interest (maslaha mursala).
We know that those who rejected public interests (masalih mursala) did so on the grounds that they lack specific or general evidence, whether partial or total. Al-Qarafi's statement that they acted upon them, along with the examples he provided, indicates that he means by "mursala" that it is unbound from specific evidence for that very action and not from general or total evidence. Precisely, it is for him a matter that the intellect understands to be subject to general or total evidence, thus falling under that evidence without there being specific evidence for it. The evidence by consideration that al-Qarafi speaks of is what attests to the intellect's correctness in understanding or judging that matter to fall under that evidence. In this sense, his statement about its existence in all schools of thought is valid; in fact, this is inevitable. If every ruling required the intellect to have evidence, no ruling would be established in this world, and certainty in the foundation of religion would not exist.
Thus, there is no basis for anyone to attribute to these two imams their stance on public interest as a source of legislation, or that the presence of public interest in an action indicates its permissibility. A further examination of al-Qarafi's statements or their statements confirms this meaning, so there is no need for lengthy elaboration.
