And perhaps the matter is perplexing to some due to the examples that al-Ghazali brings when discussing public interest (maslaha). We will present some of them to clarify this.

He says(300): "If the disbelievers took cover behind a group of Muslim captives, if we refrained from attacking them, they would strike us and overpower the abode of Islam, killing all the Muslims. If we threw our weapons, we would kill an innocent Muslim who has committed no sin, and this is not permissible in the law. If we refrained, we would empower the disbelievers over all the Muslims, allowing them to kill them, and then they would also kill the captives. It may be said that this captive is doomed to die in any case, so preserving all the Muslims is closer to the objective of the law, because we know with certainty that the aim of the law is to minimize killing, as it seeks to cut off the means to it whenever possible. If we cannot cut it off, we can minimize it, and this is an attention to a benefit that is known by necessity to be an objective of the law, not by a single piece of evidence or a specific origin, but by numerous evidences that are beyond enumeration. However, achieving this objective through this means, which is the killing of one who has committed no sin, is strange and lacks a specific origin to support it. This is an example of a benefit that is not derived from a definitive general principle. And it is not analogous to the case where the disbelievers take cover in a fortress with a Muslim, as it is not permissible to throw weapons in that case due to the lack of necessity. We are not in need of the fortress, so we would refrain from it, as we do not have certainty of our victory over it, because it is not definitive but rather speculative. And it is not analogous to a group on a ship, where if they throw one of them overboard, they would be saved; otherwise, they would all drown, because this is not a general principle, as it leads to the destruction of a limited number, and that is not like the extermination of all the Muslims..."

The first example is the killing of a group of Muslims for the sake of preserving all Muslims. Indeed, preserving Muslims from extermination and cutting off killing among them or minimizing it is an objective of the law supported by many evidences. However, killing a group of Muslims does not have a specific text. In fact, if the issue were merely the killing of a group of Muslims or even a single Muslim unjustly, it would be prohibited. This is a matter that lacks a text but has a benefit, which is a benefit that, according to the law, is indicated by many texts. So, should a group of Muslims be killed—an act that lacks a text—for the sake of that...
__________
(300) The same source, p. 294.
