Refuting the Two Objections

The first objection: that there are recognized interests, nullified interests, and interests for which the Sharia has given neither recognition nor nullification.

Let us assume here that the prevention of harm (mafsada) falls within the meaning of interest (maslaha). The gist of the statement above is that the Sharia was laid down only to secure interests, or that interests are the motives for legislation and the causes (ʿilal) of rulings. But since interests are something that the intellect estimates, that is, measures by human standards, which are subject to error and correctness and to everything that Allah has created in human nature, it was found, when the rulings were examined, that they did not all come in accordance with the interests as estimated. This alone was enough to demolish this claim at its foundation for those who held that interests are the causes of the Sharia. Instead, however, they said of the rational interests they found contradicting a text of the Sharia that they are nullified interests, and of what they found by their intellects to agree with the texts of the Sharia that it is a recognized interest.
It is in the nature of this approach, that is, holding interests to be causes and dividing them into recognized and nullified interests, that legislative inquiry ends up determining the interest from the action first, and then searching for evidence to serve it. If some meaning or suitable attribute is found in a text that fits the determined interest, the action is judged permissible and the interest recognized. If a text is found that prohibits the action leading to that interest, the action is judged prohibited, or the interest is judged not recognized. But since the rulings of the Sharia are attached to the actions of people and not to what they call an interest, they did not find, for many of the interests they determined, a text that indicates them or aims at them. Nor did they find a text that forbids them. So they said that the Sharia has given them neither recognition nor nullification, and some said that they have no ruling in the Sharia. An example is that they found no text indicating the interest resulting from the compilation of the Qur'an, no text indicating the interest intended in establishing the registers (diwans), and no text that nullifies any
