On this basis, the position of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) is understood when he read: “And [due] to Allah from the people is a pilgrimage to the House”(313). A man said: "O Messenger of Allah, every year?" He turned away, then said: "O Messenger of Allah, every year?" He turned away, then said: "O Messenger of Allah, every year?" The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, if I had said it, it would have become obligatory, and if it had become obligatory, you would not have been able to fulfill it, and if you did not fulfill it, you would have disbelieved. So leave me as I have left you"(314). The anger of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) indicates a prohibition against this type of questioning, which leads to an increase in restrictions or an increase in obligations due to excessive clarification and detail. The command for pilgrimage did not specify how many times – in the text – and performing it once suffices for obedience, just as it suffices to perform it twice or three times. If the question necessitates an answer, the answer would be an increase in clarification, which is an increase in obligations that leads to what the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) informed: “you would not have been able to fulfill it,” thus the lack of specification regarding how many times is a form of concession.
If we consider concession on this basis of understanding, we do not find it to be an area that contains actions without rulings. Rather, it is:
Entities that the legislator has not prohibited, thus they remain permissible based on the principle regarding the nature of things.
Actions whose rulings have been defined by the legislator, but he did not restrict them with additional detail or clarification regarding what the questioner might ask, like the examples we mentioned, and similar to His saying: “And kill them wherever you overtake them”(315). His saying: “kill them” is fulfilled by killing, whether the killing is done by poisoning, stabbing with a dagger, throwing a spear, strangling with a rope or by hand, or slaughtering with a knife, or shooting a bullet, or detonating a bomb, or otherwise. The lack of clarification regarding how to kill is a lack of additional clarification. And leaving the clarification here is the concession. If a questioner were to ask the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him): "Should we kill them in this way or that way?" his question would provoke the anger of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), as happened in the hadith about pilgrimage. In this regard, the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Leave me as I have left you."
__________
(313) Al-Imran/ 97.
(314) Sunan al-Nasa'i, Book of Hajj Rituals.
(315) Al-Baqarah/ 191, An-Nisa/ 91.
