Sources of Legislation

Introduction
Since Allah, Exalted is He, is the sole legislator, it is necessary for humans to know His legislation to understand what to believe in, how to worship Allah, how to fulfill their needs, address their problems, and establish their lives with others. Hence, throughout the ages, people have needed messengers to convey to them the laws of Allah, Exalted is He.
Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him) was the last of the prophets, and his message was the final message. After delivering the message, he (peace and blessings be upon him) passed away and left us with the Qur'an and the Sunnah. He said: "... adhere to my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the rightly guided caliphs; cling to it tightly, and beware of newly invented matters..."(9). And Allah, Exalted is He, said: "And whatever you disagree about, its ruling is with Allah"(10). He also said: "O you who have believed, obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. And if you disagree over anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger if you should believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is the best [way] and best in result"(11).
Thus, this message serves as legislation for all people until the Day of Judgment, containing rulings for every incident. Since human life is filled with ongoing incidents, events, issues, and problems, it is always necessary to have someone who knows Allah's ruling on every new matter, which necessitates the knowledge of the sources from which rulings are derived. These are legal rulings that were all revealed to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) through revelation, "And he does not speak from [his own] inclination. It is not but a revelation revealed"(12). Therefore, the sources from which rulings are derived, that is, the sources of legislation or the principles of legislation, are those that are definitively proven(13) to be revelation from Allah.

__________
(9) Narrated by Abu Dawood in the Book of Sunnah.
(10) Ash-Shura / 10.
(11) An-Nisa / 59.
(12) An-Najm / 3-4.
(13) As we will clarify under the following title.
