Allah, to our master Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him). Among these sources are those that are agreed upon by Muslims and those that are disputed.

The sources of legislation must be definitive.
The sources of legislation in Islam are the avenues in which Allah, Exalted is He, has deposited His commands and prohibitions. Therefore, researching the sources is one of the most important studies in the principles of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh) after the study of the ruler, and the two topics are directly related.
The sources of legislation are among the fundamental principles, thus they are linked to beliefs in terms of being universal, and in terms of the necessity for them to be definitive. Just as beliefs cannot be derived from conjecture, and it is not permissible to rely on conjecture in acquiring them due to His saying, {And most of them follow not except assumption. Indeed, assumption avails not against the truth at all}(14) and other verses, likewise the principles of jurisprudence cannot be derived from conjecture, and nothing that is conjectural is considered among the principles.
If it were permissible to accept a source for legislation based on conjecture, this would mean that it is permissible to regard conjecture or predominant conjecture from any universal source as revelation. An example of this would be to say that the Gospel and the Torah are sources of legislation, because although they are distorted according to the text of the Qur'an, it is rationally and legally permissible that some of their texts are not distorted, and these texts could potentially be used as evidence for rulings by those who believe that the legislation of those before us is legislation for us, because some texts may be conjectured to be unaltered, just as the Sunnah is a source for rulings despite the existence of weak or fabricated hadiths within it. However, this is false, as it has been narrated that he (peace and blessings be upon him) saw a piece of the Torah with Umar ibn al-Khattab, and he became angry and said: "Did I not bring it to you white and pure? If my brother Moses were to come to me, he would have no choice but to follow me"(15).
__________
(14) Yunus /36.
(15) Narrated by Ahmad in his Musnad.
