And also, if we were to rely solely on conjecture in the principles, it would be necessary to consider seeing the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) in a dream as a source, due to his saying: "Whoever sees me in a dream, it is as if he has seen me while awake"(16), and other statements that convey the same meaning. However, no one whose opinion is respected has made such a claim(17).

Therefore, the principles, like the beliefs, must be certain. Just as beliefs are only taken from certainty, so too are the principles only considered with certainty, and conjecture is only accepted in the branches. Thus, the report of the singular (khabar al-ahad) is a proof in rulings but not in beliefs.

Al-Shatibi(18) said: "The principles of jurisprudence in religion are definitive, not conjectural, and the evidence for this is that they pertain to the universals of the Sharia, and whatever is thus is definitive." He also said(19): "If conjecture were permissible as a basis in the principles of jurisprudence, it would also be permissible as a basis in the principles of religion, which is not the case by consensus... because the relationship of the principles of jurisprudence to the foundation of the Sharia is like that of the principles of religion, and although they differ in rank, they are equal in that they are considered universals in every community." Al-Shatibi adds(20): "Some have said: There is no way to establish the principles of the Sharia through conjecture, because it is legislation, and we have only been commanded by conjecture in the branches." Imam Jamal al-Din Abdul Rahim al-Asnawi states in his book "Nihayat al-Sul" when discussing the indication of (do) in terms of the fact that conjectural evidence is not considered in the principles: "As for singular reports, they are invalid because the narration of singular reports, if it is beneficial, only provides conjecture, and the legislator has only permitted conjecture in practical matters, which are the branches, not in scientific matters such as the principles of religion and likewise the principles of jurisprudence, as conveyed by al-Anbari, the commentator on al-Burhan, from all the scholars."

Based on the above, the principles of jurisprudence, including sources of legislation, must be definitive.

Agreed-Upon Sources
__________
(16) Narrated by the two Shaykhs, and the wording is from al-Bukhari.
(17) Al-Ghazali mentioned in al-Mustasfa that the claim of visions as a source of legislation is attributed to some innovators. Vol. 2.
(18) Al-Muwafaqat, Vol. 1, p. 10.
(19) The previous source.
(20) The previous source.
