"Therefore, refrain"(24). And He said: "And whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah"(25). And He said: "And if you disagree about anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger"(26). Referring to the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) after his death means referring to his Sunnah, and there are many other pieces of evidence, which are definitive in their authenticity as they are from the Qur'an, and definitive in their indication, as is clear from their texts.
There is no disagreement among Muslims that the Sunnah is a binding legal proof. Those who oppose this are outside the faith. Therefore, the disagreement is not to be considered. The one who denies the authority of the Sunnah is certainly a disbeliever.
Limiting oneself to the Book is the opinion of those who have deviated from Islam. Allah, Exalted is He, said: "But no, by your Lord, they will not believe until they make you judge in that over which they dispute among themselves and then find within themselves no discomfort from what you have judged and submit in [full, willing] submission"(27). And the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Indeed, I have been given the Qur'an and something like it with it. A man reclining on his couch will soon say, 'You should adhere to this Qur'an; whatever you find in it as lawful, make it lawful, and whatever you find in it as unlawful, make it unlawful'"(28).

The third source: Consensus
The scholars have differed regarding consensus: Consensus of whom? Some say it is the consensus of the Ummah or the consensus of the scholars, while others say it is the consensus of the mujtahids in a particular era, and some say it is the consensus of the people of Medina. The Shia have attributed to their belief the consensus of the Ahl al-Bayt or the consensus of the progeny, and it has been said that it is the consensus of the Companions. There is discussion regarding the possibility of consensus occurring after the Companions, and it has been attributed to Imam Ahmad (may Allah be pleased with him): "Whoever claims consensus is a liar."
__________
(24) Al-Hashr/ 7.
(25) An-Nisa/ 80.
(26) An-Nisa/ 59.
(27) An-Nisa/ 65.
(28) Narrated by Abu Dawood.
