Objectives of the Sharia

Before discussing the unregulated interests (masalih mursala) in terms of their definition and their status as a principle of the Sharia, it is essential to address some preliminary points that those who advocate for interests as a legal proof rely upon, including the objectives of the Sharia, the pursuit of benefits, and the prevention of harms, as well as the significance of these objectives or interests.

Objectives of the Sharia

Some of the imams of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence) state that the Sharia has objectives and that it was established to preserve these objectives for creation. Al-Amidi(56) says: "The purpose of establishing a ruling can only be classified as either belonging to the category of necessary objectives or not belonging to the category of necessary objectives. If it belongs to the category of necessary objectives, then it is either a foundational principle or not a foundational principle. If it is a foundational principle, it refers to the five objectives that have been preserved by every community and every law, which are: the preservation of religion, life, intellect, lineage, and wealth. The limitation to these five categories is based on the occurrence and the knowledge of the absence of any necessary objective outside of them in practice... If it is not a foundational principle, it is a complementary aspect of the necessary, such as the emphasis on preserving the intellect by prohibiting the consumption of even a small amount of intoxicants that leads to larger amounts, even if it is not intoxicating. As for if the objective does not belong to the necessary objectives, it is either something that people have a need for or not. If it is something that people have a need for, then it is either a foundational principle or not a foundational principle. If it is a foundational principle, it is the second category related to additional needs, such as granting the guardian authority to marry off a minor... If it is not a foundational principle, it is a supplementary aspect that serves as a completion and addition to the second category, such as considering compatibility and the customary dowry."

__________
(56) Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, vol. 3, p. 274.
