Inevitably. For this reason, there are different laws and systems among humans, some of which are man-made and some of which are from the Creator. What a person establishes for themselves in terms of systems and laws is akin to a Sharia (law) and has an intention or objectives, which the person themselves determines – since they are the one who establishes the Sharia – based on what they see as most suitable, beneficial, and correct for them. Islam, as a Sharia revealed by the Creator for people to adhere to, has objectives defined by the one who revealed the Sharia, which is Allah, Exalted is He.

It should be noted that the objectives determined by a person through their intellect when legislating for themselves do not necessarily correspond to the objectives that the Creator intends from His legislation for the message. Furthermore, a person may establish systems and laws, or even a specific plan, to bring about certain benefits or to achieve specific goals, but due to the fact that the extent of what they do not know is greater than what they do know, (and you have not been given of knowledge except a little) (69), and because they do not fully encompass the human being in terms of their instincts, inclinations, and motivations, and because they do not fully understand societies in terms of the nature and laws of their movements, whether in decline or ascent, for this reason, they may aim for a specific goal and legislate what they see as necessary to achieve it, or devise the plan they consider safest and most accurate to reach it, yet they may fail and the result may be the opposite.

Whereas the Creator has knowledge of all things, knowing what rectifies the human being and what corrupts them, and encompasses the human being in a way that is not deficient (Does He not know who created and is the Subtle, the All-Aware) (70) and knows the unseen, the movements of societies, and the laws of nature. Therefore, if He sets a goal for legislation, then the legislation must necessarily lead to that goal if adhered to. Allah, Exalted is He, said: (Indeed, this Qur'an guides to that which is most upright) (71).

The objectives of the Sharia are not the objectives of the rulings.
__________
(69) Al-Isra /85
(70) Al-Mulk /14.
(71) Al-Isra /9.
