Then indeed, these objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), which are the mercy to the worlds and the healing of people, are objectives of the Sharia as a whole, and not of specific rulings; that is, they are not objectives for each detail of the Sharia. The text states: “And We have not sent you…”(72), and the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) was sent with the message, thus the text indicates that the message – the entire message – is mercy. And His saying, Exalted is He: “And We send down from the Qur'an…”(73), indicates that the Qur'an is healing and mercy, so the texts indicate that the message as a message is mercy, and that the Qur'an and what it indicates from the Sunnah, consensus of the Companions, and analogy (qiyas), that is, the Sharia, is healing and mercy. Thus, the two texts indicate that the Sharia as a whole is mercy and healing, and there is no indication in them of the objectives of detailed rulings, or the objectives of some rulings.

There have come texts, and each one of them indicates a specific objective, so this objective is an objective for this ruling, or for this action only, and not for the Sharia, nor for other rulings.

Objectives of Rulings

Allah, Exalted is He, said: “And I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me”(74), so the worship of the Creator is the objective of creation, and this objective may be absent as we see in those who do not worship Allah, and the texts themselves indicate that among the jinn and mankind there are those who do not obey. And Allah, Exalted is He, said: “Fasting has been prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you that you may attain piety”(75). And He said: “Indeed, prayer prohibits immorality and wrongdoing”(76), so piety and prohibition are results that may occur or may not occur; the command to fast, the command to attain piety, the command to pray, and the prohibition of immorality and wrongdoing are all a mandate from the Legislator, unlike His saying, Exalted is He: “And the family of Pharaoh picked him up to be an enemy to them…”

__________

(72) Al-Anbiya / 107.
(73) Al-Isra / 82.
(74) Adh-Dhariyat / 56.
(75) Al-Baqarah / 183.
(76) Al-Ankabut / 45.
