sorrow)(77), and being an enemy and a source of sorrow is the objective behind making the family of Pharaoh pick him up, and this is a result or goal of their picking him up. It is not in the realm of what may be delayed, because it is a revelation from Allah about what He wants and what will be. It is a matter that Allah, Exalted is He, wanted to happen and is not a command.
These goals or objectives are intended from a specific ruling or from a specific action, and they are not related to the objectives of the Sharia as a whole, and therefore they are not objectives for other rulings apart from these rulings in which they are mentioned.
What has been referred to as necessary objectives are objectives for specific rulings, each one being an objective for a ruling, and not each one of them being an objective for all rulings, nor for the entire Sharia, as there is no evidence for that.
These objectives are indicated by the texts, so the preservation of religion is an objective for the prohibition of apostasy, for which the legislator has prescribed the punishment of death(78). The preservation of intellect is an objective for the prohibition of alcohol and similar substances, for which the legislator has prescribed the punishment of flogging(79). The preservation of lineage is an objective for the prohibition of adultery, for which the legislator has prescribed the punishment of stoning or flogging(80). The preservation of wealth is an objective for the prohibition of theft, for which the legislator has prescribed the punishment of amputation(81). Likewise, we find that the preservation of human dignity is an objective for the prohibition of false accusation without evidence, for which the legislator has prescribed eighty lashes. The preservation of security is an objective for the prohibition of corruption on earth, for which the legislator has prescribed the punishment of death, crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides, or exile from the land. The preservation of the state, that is, the unity of the Islamic nation and the preservation of its entity, is an objective for the prohibition of splitting the ranks of Muslims and dividing them as a community and entity or state, for which rulings for fighting the rebels have been legislated. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Whoever comes to you while your command is united upon one man and seeks to split your ranks or divide your community, kill him"(82). He also said: "If allegiance is given to two caliphs, kill the latter of the two"(83).
__________
(77) Al-Qasas / 8.
(78) See: Al-Ihkam by Al-Amidi, vol. 3, p. 274.
(79) The same source.
(80) The same source.
(81) The same source.
(82) Narrated by Muslim in the Book of Leadership.
(83) Narrated by Muslim in the Book of Leadership.
