Bringing Benefits and Preventing Harms

Some scholars of usul (principles of jurisprudence) and writers in the field have said that the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) and the objectives of rulings are to bring benefits to people and to prevent harms from them. Al-Amidi, for example, says(85): "... we know from the state of the Legislator that He does not issue a ruling devoid of wisdom, as rulings are established for the benefits of the servants, and this is not by necessity, but rather by considering the customary practice of legislating rulings." His statement that it is not by necessity is contrary to the view of the Mu'tazila, and his statement regarding considering the customary practice means by extrapolating the rulings.

He also says(86): "The purpose of legislating a ruling is either to bring a benefit or to avert a harm, or a combination of both concerning the servant, as the Exalted Lord is above harm and benefit, and perhaps this is intended for the servant because it is suitable for him and aligns with his nature." The suitable here means appropriate, and as Abu Zayd(87) said, as quoted by Al-Amidi(88): "The appropriate is that which, if presented to minds, would be accepted." However, Al-Amidi believes that it is more accurate to say(89): "The appropriate is a clear, defined description that necessitates that arranging the ruling accordingly results in what is suitable to be intended by legislating that ruling." Al-Amidi stipulates that there must be a text that attests to the consideration of the benefit or the intended purpose or the appropriate, otherwise the consideration is not valid. He states(90): "The appropriate that does not have a foundational text from the principles of the Sharia attesting to its consideration... nor has its abrogation appeared."

__________

(85) Al-Ihkam, vol. 3, p. 260.
(86) The same source, p. 271.
(87) The same source, p. 270. Abu Zayd is Ubayd Allah ibn Umar al-Dabusi, the judge, who died in 430 AH.
(88) The same source.
(89) The same source.
(90) The same source, p. 284.
