It is referred to as the appropriate maslahah (public interest) that is unqualified. And he said(91): "The jurists from the Shafi'i, Hanafi, and others have agreed on the prohibition of relying on it, and this is the truth." The appropriate maslahah is the unqualified interests (masalih mursala).
Similarly, al-Shatibi believes that the objectives (maqasid) are the interests, and when he discusses the objectives, he introduces a preface saying(92): "The purpose of establishing the laws is for the interests of the servants in both this world and the Hereafter." He also says: "If we deduce from the Sharia that it was established for the interests of the servants, a deduction that neither al-Razi nor anyone else disputes..."(93), then he says: "If the deduction indicates this and is beneficial for knowledge in such a matter, we assert that the matter is consistent in all details of the Sharia"(94). He says(95): "... as for the connection of the address to it legally, if the interest is predominant when compared to the harm in the ruling of habit, it is the intended purpose legally, and to achieve it, the demand was placed upon the servants, so that its law may proceed on the most upright path and the most guided way, and so that its attainment may be more complete, closer, and more deserving of achieving the intended goal according to the prevailing customs in this world. If it is followed by harm or hardship, it is not intended in the legality of that action and its demand. Likewise, if the harm is predominant in relation to the interest in the ruling of consideration, then its removal is the intended purpose legally, and for this reason, the prohibition was established, so that its removal may be achieved in the best possible ordinary ways in such cases, as every sound mind testifies. If it is followed by an interest or pleasure, it is not the intended purpose of the prohibition of that action; rather, the intended purpose is what predominates in the matter, and anything else is annulled in accordance with the prohibition, just as the aspect of harm is annulled in the aspect of command."
Thus, al-Shatibi sees from the deduction of the Sharia, that is, from examining its particulars, that its rulings have objectives that are to bring about interests and avert harms. If the legislator commands something and reason finds that alongside the interest there is harm, the intended purpose of the command is the interest, and the harm is not intended. Likewise,
__________
(91) The same source.
(92) Al-Muwafaqat, vol. 2, p. 3.
(93) The same source.
(94) The same source, p. 4.
(95) The same source, p. 18.
