The appropriateness

Al-Shawkani(102) said: "The appropriateness is the essence of the book of analogy (qiyas) and the place of its ambiguity and clarity, and extracting it is called the extraction of the legal basis (takhrij al-manaat)." Al-Shawkani attributed to al-Mahsool: "People have mentioned two things in defining appropriateness: the first is that it leads to what is beneficial for a person in terms of acquisition and preservation, and it may be expressed in terms of acquisition as bringing benefit and in terms of preservation as repelling harm. The second is that it is suitable for the actions of rational beings in customs, as it is said that this pearl is appropriate for this pearl in bringing them together in a compatible string."(103)

Some have defined appropriateness as that which, if presented to minds, would be accepted. Abu Zayd al-Dabbusi said this, as did al-Shatibi. Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi mentioned that appropriateness is the attribute that, when establishing a ruling, leads to a benefit(104). Ali al-Shashi gave an example and said(105): "If we see a person giving a poor man a dirham, it is likely that the giving is to meet the need of the poor and to acquire the reward." From this, it can be inferred that meeting the need and acquiring the reward is an appropriate description and thus serves as the reason for the giving.

Al-Shawkani quotes al-Razi saying(106): "Appropriateness is what entails acquiring a benefit or repelling a harm; the former is like wealth being the reason for the obligation of zakat, and the latter is like intoxication being the reason for the prohibition of wine." He also quotes Ibn al-Hajib's definition of appropriateness(107): "Appropriateness is an apparent, well-defined attribute that is rationally derived from the arrangement of the ruling upon it, which is suitable to be intended for acquiring a benefit or repelling a harm." All these definitions convey a similar meaning, approximately.

__________
(102) Irshad al-Fuhul, p. 214-215.
(103) The same source.
(104) Rawdat al-Nazir wa Jannat al-Manazir.
(105) Usul al-Shashi.
(106) Irshad al-Fuhul.
(107) The same source.
