Categories of Interests
Based on this, any report that the appropriate description is interest (m interest), interests have been divided in terms of consideration, similar to the division of the appropriate into three categories:
The first category: the recognized interests, which the Sharia has acknowledged as valid based on evidence that has been explicitly stated.
The second category: the abrogated interests, which the Sharia has declared invalid, such as the fatwa of Yahya ibn Yahya al-Faqih al-Maliki to the Umayyad caliph Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hakam when he engaged in sexual relations during the day in Ramadan, that he must fast for two consecutive months. When he was reproached for this, as he was not commanded to free a slave despite his ample wealth for that, he said: "If I had commanded him to do that, it would have been easy for him, and he would have belittled freeing a slave in light of fulfilling his desire." Thus, the interest in mandating fasting was to deter him. This is a false statement that contradicts the text of the Sunnah because the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) said to the Bedouin who told him: "I had relations with my family during Ramadan." He said to him: "Free a slave." He said: "I cannot find one." He said: "Fast for two consecutive months." He said: "I cannot bear it." He said: "Feed sixty needy people."(111). There is no disagreement regarding the non-recognition of these interests.
The third category: what the Sharia has neither acknowledged as valid nor invalidated. This category is what is referred to as the unqualified interests (masalih mursala). As is clear, they are unqualified by evidence. There is no evidence from the Sharia that indicates them. Rather, the interest is considered based on rational judgment that it brings about a benefit or goodness, or repels harm or prevents corruption.
Many contemporary scholars in the field of usul (principles of jurisprudence) adhere to this classification of interests and the reasoning based on interest(112). For example, Dr. Muhammad Saeed Ramadan al-Bouti concludes that interests are reasons for rulings, but he sets conditions for interest that he calls criteria, stating(113): "Those who considered beliefs...
__________
(111) This story can be found in most books of usul that discuss unqualified interests.
(112) Such as al-Bouti and al-Bagha, for instance, who cite almost the same texts as al-Shatibi. See the impact of differing evidences, pp. 38-40, and see the book Criteria of Interest.
(113) Criteria of Interest, p. 87.
