The reality is constantly changing and developing, and the new developments require an endless and limitless number of rulings. As for the texts or partial principles, they are limited and finite, and the finite cannot suffice for anything other than the finite. Therefore, it is necessary to have a way to establish partial rulings, and this way is through public interest (maslaha), based on the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) in a comprehensive manner. Some scholars of hadith(133) say: "The changing morals, integrity, and conditions of people may lead to a situation where what was once a benefit becomes a harm. If the door of legislation through public interest were not opened for the jurists, Islamic law would become narrow in addressing the interests of the people, falling short of their needs, and would not be suitable for keeping pace with various places, times, environments, and conditions. This is contrary to what is known about it in terms of flexibility, comprehensiveness, and expansiveness."(134)
"The companions of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) undertook many actions for which there was no prior evidence to consider, but they did so purely based on the benefit they perceived in them, ... rather, they legislated for these incidents (and rulings) what they saw as achieving the public interest (maslaha) that brings benefit or prevents harm, according to what their minds comprehended."(135).
One of the matters that it is claimed the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) acted upon as an inference from public interest (maslaha mursala) is:
Their agreement (may Allah be pleased with them) to compile the scattered pages in which the Qur'an was written into a single mushaf occurred when the killing of the memorizers of the Qur'an increased in the Battle of Yamama during the time of Abu Bakr, at the suggestion of Umar (may Allah be pleased with them both), when he saw the benefit in this compilation.
The appointment of Abu Bakr to Umar and his nomination for the leadership after him has no apparent support other than the public interest (maslaha) that he considered.
__________
(133) The impact of the differing evidence, p. 55. And see the authority of public interests (maslaha).
(134) The previous source.
(135) This text is from Dr. Mustafa al-Bagha's book The Impact of Divergent Evidence, p. 54, and similar statements are made by many contemporary scholars today. This statement is somewhat echoed by some of the imams, but none were as bold as al-Bagha to say "for whatever they found in it of benefit." Indeed, some of the imams restricted it to being in accordance with the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), and some restricted it to what the Sharia has established as benefit, and you will see this clearly in what follows when we discuss al-Shatibi's opinion and the opinion of Ibn Abd al-Salam. Al-Qarafi said in his book (Sharh Tanqih al-Fusul): "It is known that the unregulated benefit (mashlaha mursala) is more specific than the unrestricted analogy and unrestricted benefit." Page 394.
