ج- Umar left the caliphate to be decided by consultation (shura) among six of the senior companions, not leaving the matter as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) did, nor appointing one person as Abu Bakr did; and there is no basis for this except for public interest (maslaha).
د- Umar established the diwan (registers) and organized them in such a way that they encompassed all the interests of the state, and he adopted the prison and dated it from the Hijra (migration).
هـ- The liability of craftsmen. Al-Shatibi says: "The rightly guided caliphs ruled on the liability of craftsmen, and Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) said: 'People cannot be right except through that.'"
و- The companions of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) agreed after him on the punishment for the drinker of alcohol to be eighty lashes, relying on public interests.
ز- Umar ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) would share the governors whom he suspected regarding their wealth, due to the mixing of their private funds with the wealth they acquired through the authority of governance. This is in the interest of public welfare (maslaha mursala).
ح- It was narrated from Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) that he poured out adulterated milk mixed with water as a reprimand for the deceiver, and this was for the public interest so that sellers would not deceive the people.
ط- It was narrated from Umar ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) that he would execute a group for the act of one if they participated in killing him, because public interest necessitated that, as there is no text on the matter.
ي- Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) did not divide the lands that the Muslims conquered by force, which are the lands of Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, although some companions requested him to divide these lands that Allah had granted them through their swords, as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) divided Khaybar when he conquered it.
ك- What al-Bouti mentioned as an example of the actions of the successors regarding the adoption of public interest (istislah), which is "a number of rulings made by Umar ibn Abdul Aziz (may Allah be pleased with him) during his caliphate. Among them... his order to the governors to establish inns along the road to Khurasan for travelers to take refuge in during their journeys and travels. This was an action not known in the time of the Prophet.
