And moving away from ambiguity, I will present below some of the opinions of the scholars, and I will present the positions that it is claimed the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) took regarding public interest (maslaha) in its unregulated form.
As for the positions of the imams and scholars, the majority hold that public interest (maslaha) in its unregulated form is not a legal proof. Imam al-Shafi'i (may Allah be pleased with him) rejected this view. Al-Amidi reported this from him. Many scholars of the Shafi'i school, such as al-Amidi, al-Ghazali, and Izz al-Din ibn Abd al-Salam, also reported his rejection. It is well-known that al-Shafi'i said: "Whoever deems something good has legislated." This condemned deeming good, according to al-Shafi'i, includes the public interest (maslaha) intended by the Malikis.
Imam al-Shafi'i says in his Risala: "Indeed, deeming good is a form of pleasure," and then he states: "The scholar should not speak except from the perspective of knowledge, and the perspective of knowledge is the necessary report by analogy with the evidence of what is correct, so that the scholar is always following a report, and the seeker of knowledge is by analogy," and he said: "If he speaks without a necessary report or analogy, he is closer to sin than the one who speaks while being ignorant..." He also said: "And Allah has not allowed anyone after the Messenger of Allah to speak except from the perspective of knowledge that has preceded him, and the perspective of knowledge thereafter is the Book, the Sunnah, consensus, and the reports, and what I have described of analogy upon them"(139).
From these statements of Imam al-Shafi'i (may Allah be pleased with him), we understand that he strongly criticizes public interest (maslaha) in its unregulated form just as he criticizes deeming good, and indeed the former is included in the latter for him, as it is neither a necessary report nor an analogy since it is unregulated. Therefore, al-Ghazali said the same as al-Shafi'i. He said: "Indeed, whoever deems something good has legislated just as whoever deems something good has legislated"(140).
Public interest (maslaha) in its unregulated form is not considered by Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (may Allah be pleased with him), and it is not mentioned among the principles he relied upon. Scholars of his school, such as Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi, have rejected it. As for what some contemporary scholars claim that he follows Imam Malik in accepting it(141), this is a statement for which there is no evidence.
__________
(139) Risala, p. 508, issues from 1464 to 1468.
(140) Al-Mustasfa, vol. 1, p. 245.
(141) The Criteria of Public Interest, p. 368. The Authority of Public Interest in its Unregulated Form by Ahmad Faraj Hussein, p. 65.
