As for the Hanafis, it is well-known that they do not accept istislah (public interest) and do not consider it. Al-Amidi reported their rejection of masalih mursala (unrestricted public interests) along with the Shafi'is(144).
Al-Bagha(145) quotes Dr. Abdul Wahab Khalaf from his book (Sources of Islamic Legislation): "It is well-known in some books that they do not accept istislah and do not consider it a legal proof." Here, we also encounter an attempt to assert that the Hanafis do accept istislah, as Khalaf(146) states: "... it is unlikely that they would accept istihsan (juridical preference) and deny istislah." This is a strong viewpoint since istislah and istihsan are intertwined. Dr. Al-Bagha and Al-Bouti also support Khalaf's view that "the share of maslaha in his (i.e., Abu Hanifa's) jurisprudence lies in two of the most important proofs... which are istihsan and 'urf (custom)"(147). It is clear from what has been reported about him that he does not accept maslaha, even if it overlaps with istihsan. The Hanafis' acceptance of istihsan is only because they have evidence for it, while they reject istislah because there is no evidence supporting it. This is the crux of the matter, and it is not about the proximity or distance of one from the other. The examples brought to demonstrate the existence of istislah in Hanafi jurisprudence are, in their view, supported by istihsan, and Allah knows best, not istislah.
Regarding what has been reported about Imam Malik (may Allah be pleased with him), the opinions are almost unanimous on his consideration of masalih mursala, although Al-Qurtubi denied this, as we will show. There is a difference in the extent to which he goes in his acceptance of it. Al-Shatibi reported in Al-I'tisam that he elaborated on it extensively, like a seasoned scholar deeply understanding the meanings of public interests, and then said: "Indeed, many scholars have criticized various aspects of his elaboration." Al-Shawkani(148) said: "What is reported about Malik is the permissibility of saying it absolutely." He also said(149): "Al-Juwayni stated in Al-Burhan that Malik went to extremes in this matter."
__________
(144) Al-Ihkam, vol. 4, p. 160.
(145) Athar Al-Adillah Al-Mukhtalaf Fiha, p. 45.
(146) The same source, quoting from Sources of Islamic Legislation.
(147) See: Dawa'ib Al-Maslahah, p. 381.
(148) Irshad Al-Fuhul, p. 242.
(149) The same source.
