"His statement led him to permit killing and taking wealth for interests that he presumed to be necessary, even if he did not find a basis for them."
Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi(150) said: "It has been reported that Malik said it is permissible to kill one-third of the people for the benefit of the two-thirds." Among what is reported from Malik contrary to this is what has been attributed to al-Qurtubi, for example. Al-Shawkani(151) said: "A group of Malikis have denied what has been attributed to Malik regarding this statement, including al-Qurtubi. Al-Shafi'i and most of Abu Hanifah's companions held that it should not be relied upon, which is also Malik's position. Al-Juwayni, the Imam of the Two Holy Sanctuaries, was bold and reckless in what he attributed to Malik regarding excess in this principle. This does not exist in Malik's books or in any of his companions' books." Thus, al-Qurtubi denies that Malik or any of his companions said this.
Al-Bouti cites from the followers of Malik, such as al-Shatibi and al-Qarafi, that he (may Allah have mercy on him) adopted public interest (maslaha) where it aligned with the objectives of the wise Sharia (maqasid al-sharia)(152).
And the truth is that if the attribution of the saying regarding public interest (maslaha murasala) to Malik is established, it cannot be established in any case - given what is known of his condition and his strictness in following the texts and rejecting innovation - that he would say it in contradiction to the texts. Rather, if he were to say it, his reliance on it would not differ from what his followers have presented. We can understand the reality of his opinion when we elaborate on the understanding of al-Shatibi and al-Qarafi regarding public interest. As for al-Ghazali, I have previously pointed out the confusion in knowing his opinion. Some have found al-Ghazali's statements perplexing and thought that he advocates for public interest in certain cases.
The fact is that his statement in al-Mustasfa is clear, and there is no need to circle around the texts. In al-Mustasfa, the title is as follows(153): "Then what is presumed to be from the foundations but is not, which are also four: the law of those before us, the statement of a companion (sahabi), istihsan (preference), and istislah (public interest)." He also said(154): "With these conditions that we have mentioned, it is permissible to follow
__________
(150) The Garden of the Observer and the Paradise of the Spectator, p. 150.
(151) Guidance of the Thinkers, p. 242.
(152) See: The Criteria of Public Interest (maslaha).
(153) The Purified, vol. 1, p. 245.
(154) The same source, p. 315.
