As for what they said, that these meanings and motivations are interests (masalih) in which reason perceives the goodness of what the Sharia commands and the evil of what it prohibits, we have previously stated that this designation (masalih) is a human approximation and not from the legislator. Therefore, it has no legal value, whether it is called interests or otherwise. The claim that reason perceives from these interests the goodness of what the Sharia commands and the evil of what it prohibits is incorrect, as we have explained earlier when discussing justice, benevolence, and wrongdoing, and when discussing mercy and healing(200). In addition, these objectives, if indicated by the text, are results that may occur or may not occur. So, if they do not occur, does a person perceive the opposite from them, that is, does he perceive the goodness of what the Sharia prohibits and the evil of what it commands? This is one aspect; on the other hand, goodness and evil are not included within what reason can perceive. What a person loves may occur, and what he hates may occur, but the improvement and disapproval do not follow what a person loves or hates, nor what is deemed good or bad. Allah, Exalted is He, said: “And perhaps you dislike something while it is good for you”(201). As for the statement that Allah, Exalted is He, "obligated upon us what our minds perceive as beneficial and prohibited upon us what our minds do not perceive as harmful," it is evidently flawed and invalid. If that were the case, what need would we have for the Sharia of Islam then? Rather, Allah has obligated upon us things from which we may not perceive any benefit or harm, and prohibited upon us things from which we may not perceive any benefit or harm. He has imposed upon us obligations from which we only perceive that we must listen and obey, and this is the meaning of servitude to Allah. This statement: "He obligated upon us what our minds perceive as beneficial and prohibited upon us what our minds perceive as harmful" is false and has nothing to do with Islam.

The fourth proof(202): that reality changes and evolves continuously, while the texts are limited; therefore, it is necessary to establish sources for legislation, and their claim that the finite cannot suffice without the infinite necessitates taking into account the unregulated interests (masalih mursala).

__________
(200) See pages 77-78, 80-81.
(201) Al-Baqarah 216, and Allah, Exalted is He, said in Surah An-Nisa, verse 19: “And perhaps you dislike something and Allah makes therein much good.”
(202) See page 63.
