It is therefore incorrect, and at best, it is a misconception. Even if there were an action by the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) for which we do not have evidence from the Qur'an, Sunnah, or analogy, it would not be correct to say that their evidence was public interest (maslaha mursala), unless there is proof of that. Moreover, the actions of the Companions, even if we do not find evidence for them in the Qur'an, Sunnah, or analogy, are evidence in themselves if they reached consensus on them. Thus, all claims relying on the Companions' use of public interest in cases where there is no denier fall away. The consensus of the Companions indicates the existence of evidence, even if it has not reached us.

There is no indication that they considered public interest. The examples they provided from the actions of the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) will be examined one by one:

Their agreement (may Allah be pleased with them) to compile the scattered pages into a single mushaf after the killing of the Qur'an memorizers in the Battle of Yamama. And their agreement on the copying of the mushaf.

This action does not indicate that public interest was evidence for its permissibility. Did any of the Companions say that they derived this action from public interest? The command of Abu Bakr to compile the Qur'an and the command of Uthman to copy the mushaf and burn the other mushafs indicate that it was a removal of a great harm. When the killing of the Qur'an memorizers increased, and there was fear for the Qur'an from being lost if the killing of the reciters continued, they saw the necessity of compiling the Qur'an. The occurrence of differences in the recitation of the Qur'an due to the differences in the copies of the mushafs raised the fear that this would lead to disagreement in the Qur'an among the Muslims. Therefore, Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman said to Uthman: "Catch the Muslims before they differ." So he ordered the copying of the mushaf into one version and burned the rest, all of which was a harm removed by the Caliph of the Muslims. This was not a public interest acted upon by him, but rather because the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) commanded the removal of harm. Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) reported that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "There should be no harm nor reciprocating harm"(208).

__________

(208) Narrated by Ibn Majah in the Book of Judgments, Chapter 17. In some narrations: "There should be no harm nor causing harm."
