The actions of Abu Bakr and Uthman were to remove harm, and each of their actions was based on the Sunnah (tradition) and not merely because they saw it as a public interest (maslaha).
If someone says that removing harm is a public interest, I say: Yes, but the public interest was not the evidence for the action; rather, its evidence is the hadith, and the reality they sought to address with their actions was not the evidence, because the evidence is established in the indication of the text. As for the reality, it is the basis upon which the hadith was focused. Therefore, it is likely that Abu Bakr's hesitation in accepting Umar's statement was to verify the basis.
And if someone asks: Why do you cite their actions based on the Sunnah when they did not explicitly state that, and you reject the evidence of public interest because they did not explicitly state that? The answer is that we know with certainty that the Sunnah is evidence, and we also know with certainty that they derive evidence from it. As for the public interest, it has not been established as evidence, so it is not correct to make it evidence for them, neither in this incident nor in others.

The appointment of Abu Bakr as successor to Umar.

They say: There is no apparent evidence for it other than public interest(209). The objectivity indicates that public interest was not a basis for Abu Bakr's action, neither apparent nor hidden. We can apply the term public interest to the outcome that Abu Bakr sought from his action. However, it is not the evidence for his action; rather, the evidence for his action is the Sunnah, which has indicated the permissibility of this action. It is well known that Muslims differ on whether the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) appointed an imam after him or not. Some of the Sunnis believe that he appointed Abu Bakr as imam, as he said in his illness: "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer"(210). Others say that he did not appoint anyone for the caliphate; rather, his command to Abu Bakr to lead was a nomination for the caliphate. This is due to the indication of the texts that the imam does not become an imam except through the pledge of allegiance (bay'ah) of confirmation. This
__________
(209) See page 64.
(210) Narrated by al-Bukhari in the Book of Al-I'tisam, and the Twelver Shia believe that he (peace and blessings be upon him) appointed Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) as imam. They support this with rational arguments that are not valid for evidence and with weak hadiths. They make the imamate of Ali part of their creed.
