The latter is the more correct view. If the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) nominated Abu Bakr for the caliphate, this is evidence for Abu Bakr regarding the nomination of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him). Abu Bakr's action is nothing but a nomination for Umar, and a guidance for the Muslims towards what is best for them. Umar did not become caliph except through the pledge of allegiance after the death of Abu Bakr. It is not possible to make him a caliph through Abu Bakr's appointment, because if that were the case, there would have been two caliphs for the Muslims at the same time, which is not permissible according to his saying (peace and blessings be upon him): "If two caliphs are pledged allegiance to, then kill the latter of the two"(211). Thus, this action of Abu Bakr is supported by the action of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) and not by public interest (maslaha). As for what he aimed for in the action, whether it was public interest or what is best or the prevention of harm, these are desired outcomes, but they hold no value in legislation. Rather, the action that is considered is what leads to the outcome, whether it is beneficial, in the interest of the people, and good, or whether it is to prevent harm, corruption, and evil. The action requires evidence from the Sharia, and mere intention for public interest is not the evidence. In our case, the nomination is permissible, and leaving it is also permissible; thus, whoever acts in this matter chooses, based on the evidence of permissibility, what he sees as best.

C- Umar left the matter to consultation among six of the Companions(212).

What is said here is similar to what was said regarding Abu Bakr's appointment of Umar, for the public interest of the Muslims was before Umar (may Allah be pleased with him). However, the mere fact that it was a public interest as he saw it was not the evidence for the action. He explicitly stated this when he said: "If I appoint a successor, I have appointed one better than me, and if I leave it, I have left one better than me"(213). Here, he clarifies his evidence for his action, and it is understood from his words that both appointing a successor and leaving it are permissible.
__________
(211) Narrated by Muslim in the Book of Leadership.
(212) Refer to page 64.
(213) History of Nations and Kings by al-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 34, and al-Bukhari in the Book of Judgments. The wording is as in al-Tabari.
