The reliance on the craftsmen is not sufficiently established to depend on it." But I do not know why al-Bouti relied on it in such a matter.
What we mentioned about al-Bouti two pages ago is almost quoted verbatim from al-Shatibi in al-I'tisam, but the detail that appears in al-Bouti makes his intent different from that of al-Shatibi. Al-Shatibi does not base the proof of liability on public interest (maslaha), but rather the public interest is the desired outcome, and the evidence is established from the Sharia, whether general or specific. Al-Shatibi says(227): "And in the hadith 'There should be neither harming nor reciprocating harm'(228) the principles testify to it(229) in general, for the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) prohibited a resident from selling to a nomad, and said: 'Let people earn their livelihood from one another'(230), and said: 'Do not throw goods until they are brought down to the market'(231). This is from the preference of public interest over private interest. Thus, the liability of craftsmen falls into that category. We can argue that the claim of liability based on evidence like that which al-Shatibi presented is not valid due to the existence of specific evidence regarding liability. Therefore, the liability of craftsmen is not permissible because it contradicts the Sharia as we have previously explained. In any case, there is no room in this matter to argue for unregulated public interests.

And the consensus of the companions of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) after him on the punishment for the drinker of alcohol being eighty lashes is based on public interests(232).

This statement is flawed. For the punishment for the drinker of alcohol is established by the Sunnah, and the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) punished the drinker of alcohol. It is narrated from Anas that "the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) was brought a man who had drunk alcohol and he lashed him."
__________
(227) Al-I'tisam p. 7.
(228) Narrated by Ibn Majah.
(229) Meaning for liability.
(230) Narrated by Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, and others; the wording is from Muslim.
(231) Narrated by al-Bukhari and others.
(232) See p. 64.
