It is permissible. His action (may Allah be pleased with him) is from the perspective of holding the rulers accountable. This accountability was practiced by the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him). Moreover, it is a form of advising the Muslims and striving in their counsel and caring for their affairs. He (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "There is no ruler who oversees the affairs of the Muslims and does not strive for them and advise them except that he will not enter Paradise with them"(237). Umar's (may Allah be pleased with him) sharing with the rulers is due to the mixing of their wealth with the public funds that they benefited from through their governance, so Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) took from them what they gained through their authority. This is similar to what the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) did with the one he appointed over the alms. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) warned against touching public funds and emphasized this warning, and when he saw it from one of his governors, he admonished him and addressed the people regarding it. From Abu Hamid al-Sa'idi, the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) appointed Ibn al-Lutbiyah over the alms of Banu Sulaym, and when he came to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), he held him accountable, saying: "This is for you, and this is a gift that was given to me." The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Why did you not sit in your father's and mother's house until your gift came to you if you are truthful?" Then the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) stood up and addressed the people, praising Allah and extolling Him, then said: "As for what follows, I appoint men from among you over matters that Allah has entrusted to me, and one of you may come and say, 'This is for you, and this is a gift that was given to me.' Why did he not sit in his father's and mother's house until his gift came to him if he is truthful? By Allah, no one of you will take anything unjustly except that he will come carrying it on the Day of Resurrection"(238). This is a metaphor for Allah holding him accountable and punishing him for his actions, and it is a severe warning against the ruler touching public funds in any way or under any pretext or fatwa. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) reclaimed from anyone who was appointed over the affairs of the Muslims the wealth – which is the gift – that he received by virtue of his authority, so Umar's (may Allah be pleased with him) action is supported by the Sunnah.

H- It has been narrated that Umar poured out the adulterated milk and that this was an act based on public interest (maslaha mursala)(239).
__________
(237) Narrated by Muslim.
(238) Narrated by al-Bukhari in the Book of Judgments, and Muslim in the Book of Governance, and the wording is from al-Bukhari.
(239) See page 64.
