And this is also incorrect. The public interest (maslaha) is a result, and the action is evidenced by the Sunnah. This action of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) falls under the category of market oversight (hisbah), and its evidence is the Sunnah. He (may Allah be pleased with him) used to inspect the market just as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) did when "he saw a pile of wheat and extended his hand, and found it wet. He said to the owner of the pile: What is this? He replied: The sky has rained on us. He said: Make the wetness apparent so that people may know it"(240). Umar was performing hisbah to monitor the sellers, and when he saw adulterated milk, he punished the deceiver, and this punishment of pouring out his milk is a form of ta'zir, which is a punishment whose estimation is left to the imam or the judge, and he may determine it as he sees fit within the limits of the Sharia, and it is not a legal ruling evidenced by public interest.

As for Umar killing a group for the sake of one. And that he did this only based on public interest (maslaha mursala) since there is no text on the subject(241).

This also does not suffice to claim that the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) relied on public interest (maslaha mursala). For the evidence of Umar's action here is analogy (qiyas). May Allah reward their father, those who claim that Umar sheds the blood of a group of people, even Muslims, without evidence from the Sharia. The difficult riddle here is what al-Bouti suggests, saying that the evidence for killing a group for the sake of one is found in the verses of retribution (the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female)(242) and "And We ordained upon them therein a life for a life..."(243). And he says(244): "The verse of retribution indicates that a group is killed for the sake of one due to its specification of the rationale, and due to the complete presence of the rationale in each individual of the group separately. So how can it be said about this ruling that Umar enacted and which the majority of jurists agreed upon, except for the Zahiris and some Hanbalis: that it is a ruling opposed to the text? Indeed, how can some say that

__________
(240) Narrated by Muslim in the Book of Faith.
(241) See p. 64.
(242) Al-Baqarah/178.
(243) Al-Ma'idah/45.
(244) The Limits of Public Interest, p. 150.
