"Is his evidence الاستحسان (istihsan) or المصلحة المرسلة (maslaha mursala)?" This is his statement on page 150 of his book "Dawabit al-Maslahah". Then he says on page 357: "The fatwa of Umar regarding the killing of a group for the sake of one was of the nature of المصلحة المرسلة (maslaha mursala)." He – al-Bouti – brings this issue as an example of the Companions taking المصلحة المرسلة (maslaha mursala), stating(245): "However, this basis of interest does not have a specific text indicating it nor a witness from an original to be compared to, so it was of the nature of المصلحة المرسلة (maslaha mursala)." Indeed, how does he derive the ruling from the text and say(246): "What the researcher sees after careful consideration is that each of the two verses of retribution mentioned carries a clear indication of this ruling." Then he states what we mentioned above about the absence of a text or witness from an original for comparison? The difficult riddle is that he derives the ruling from the text, yet believes that Umar – who he is – relied on المصلحة المرسلة (maslaha mursala). Does he mean to say that he understood it and Umar did not?
The correct view is that the two verses do not indicate that a group can be killed for the act of one.
There is no doubt that a group can be killed for the act of one, based on the Sunnah, because the texts of the hadiths that discuss the punishment for a killer include both the individual and the group. The saying of the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him): "Whoever is killed for a murder has two options: either to seek compensation or to have the killer executed"(247) includes the case where he was killed by one person or by a group.
It is narrated that Umar had doubts regarding the case of a murder in which seven participated, "So Ali said to him: O Commander of the Faithful, what if a group participated in a theft, would you cut off their hands? He said: Yes. He said: Likewise"(248). Therefore, if a group, two or more, participates in the killing of one person, they are all punished, and they are all to be killed, even if the victim is one(249).
__________
(245) The regulations of public interest (maslaha), p. 357.
(246) The same source, p. 149.
(247) Narrated by al-Bukhari.
(248) The narration is in al-Muwatta.
(249) See: The system of punishments by Abdul Rahman al-Maliki.
