Ibn Hazm says regarding this issue(250): "... Ibn Jurayj reported to me that Abdul Karim and Abu Bakr both said: 'Omar was uncertain about it until Ali said to him: O Commander of the Faithful, what if a group shared in stealing a camel, and this one took a part and that one took a part, would you cut off their hands?' He said: 'Yes.' Ali said: 'That is when neither is the root of the other, because the text has come regarding the killing of one who kills, just as it has come regarding the cutting off of one who steals, and neither of the two texts in the Qur'an is stronger than the other.' Allah, Exalted is He, said: {And there is for you in retaliation life}(251), and He said: {And the recompense of an evil deed is an evil one like it}(252), and He said: {As for the thief, the male and the female, amputate their hands}(253), and He did not specify in either case one who is alone from one who participates. If it were valid, it would only be that he objected to Omar's differing judgment and that he abandoned one of the texts and adhered to the other"(254). Ibn Hazm believes that the evidence is the text of the Qur'an, and here he intends to refute the argument of Omar's use of analogy (qiyas), as he does not consider it a proof. Whether the evidence in this matter is analogy or text, there is no way to claim that Omar (may Allah be pleased with him) relied on public interest (maslaha).

Y- The fact that Omar (may Allah be pleased with him) did not divide the lands that the Muslims conquered by force, which are the lands of Iraq, Syria, and Egypt(255). Bilal, Abdul Rahman, and Al-Zubair requested him to divide these lands that Allah had granted them by their swords, just as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) divided the land of Khaybar among the fighters when he conquered it.

The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), after concluding the truce with Quraysh at Hudaybiyyah, attacked Khaybar and Allah granted him and the believers victory over it by force, and He made their land, homes, and wealth his. He divided the spoils and the lands after he
__________
(250) Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 176.
(251) Al-Baqarah/ 179.
(252) Ash-Shura/ 40.
(253) Al-Ma'idah/ 38.
(254) Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 176.
(255) Kitab al-Amwal by Abu Ubayd. See p. 64.
