And he divided what was besides it among the early emigrants (muhajirin) without the helpers (ansar) except for two men among them. And in the Battle of Hunayn, after the conquest of Mecca, the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) divided the wealth and pardoned the captives. The actions of the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) indicate that the matter of land, wealth, and captives is entrusted to the caliph, who manages it in a way that he sees as beneficial for Islam, that is, in a manner that aids and affirms the application of Islam within the Islamic state, and carries the call through jihad to other nations and peoples; thus, this action does not involve reasoning based on public interest (maslaha), but rather aims to achieve the interests of Muslims through permissible actions. Therefore, the action of the Commander of the Faithful, Umar ibn al-Khattab, is not from the category of unregulated public interests (masalih mursala) in any way.
K- The last example that we mention here, which is from the works of the successors (tabi'in), indicates that a number of the rulings made by Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz included his instruction to the governors to establish inns along the road to Khurasan(259).
This is also not a matter of public interest (maslaha murasala), but rather it pertains to taking care of the affairs of Muslims and advising them. This is something that the Sharia has established with evidence from the Sharia itself, and not from public interest (maslaha murasala). We have discussed this sufficiently when we talked about Umar's establishment of the diwan and his accountability of the governors(260).
Thus, all the incidents narrated about the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) do not contain any evidence based on public interest (maslaha mursala), but rather they are based on legal proofs.
The evidence that public interests (maslaha) are not a legal proof

If the argument based on the evidence they presented for the validity of public interests (maslaha) is rejected, this alone is sufficient to refute them and not to consider them. Nevertheless, they are invalid for several reasons.
__________
(259) See page 65 of this research.
(260) See pages 89-90 of this research.
