The legal proofs (adillah shar'iyyah) are from the roots, and it is a condition for them to be definitive (qat'i). The public interest (maslaha mursala) is a delusive proof, and at best, it is speculative (dhanni). Therefore, it is not correct to consider public interest as a proof. As for the claim that it is a proof but not a foundational source in itself, or that it is not equivalent to the Qur'an, the Sunnah, consensus (ijma), and analogy (qiyas), but rather refers back to the four sources, then - if this claim is valid - the proof would be the source to which it referred.
The public interest is rejected in terms of its definition, that is, in terms of it being "mursala" (unrestricted), as its being "mursala" means it is sent from the proof. By its definition, there is no proof for it. Thus, there remains no reason for consideration except for whims or the judgment of reason. This is not part of the religion. Making the Sharia as a whole a rejected proof is invalid. For the Sharia as a whole does not have a specific meaning that it indicates.
It is not known from the legislator (al-shari') that he preserved the intended purpose by every means. Rather, he specified a path that must be adhered to. When we recognized, for example, that one of the objectives of the Sharia is the preservation of the intellect, we did not know the method of that preservation through reason. Rather, we recognized it from the Sharia, and the Sharia constrained us by its method. We originally did not know the objective except through the legislated rulings. And consider what we have cited from Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi on page 72.
The claim of public interest contradicts the definition of the legal ruling. It is the address of the legislator concerning the actions of the servants, and if there is no address, then there is no legal ruling. We are commanded to follow the Sharia only. Allah, Exalted is He, said: “Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord”(261).
And He said: “And whatever the Messenger has given you, take it; and what he has forbidden you, refrain from it”(262).
__________
(261) Al-A'raf/ 3.
(262) Al-Hashr/ 7.
