The estimation that a certain matter is in the public interest (maslaha) is dependent on reason, and human intellects vary; their judgments are not considered Sharia, whether they are correct or incorrect. To deem an action as Sharia-compliant simply because it is seen as beneficial by reason is to grant reason a role in determining what is good and bad, which contradicts the sovereignty of Allah alone: “The judgment is for none but Allah”(263).
There are many texts that prohibit following public interest (maslaha) because it is based on desire and opinion. For example, His saying, Exalted is He: “And know that among you is the Messenger of Allah; if he were to obey you in much of what you command, you would surely be in trouble”(264). And He said: “And if you disagree about anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger”(265). And He said: “And it is not for a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah and His Messenger have decreed a matter, that they should have any choice in their affair”(266). And He said: “But no! By your Lord, they will not believe until they make you judge concerning that over which they dispute among themselves and then find within themselves no discomfort from what you have judged and submit in [full, willing] submission”(267). And He said: “Fighting has been enjoined upon you while it is hateful to you, and perhaps you hate a thing and it is good for you, and perhaps you love a thing and it is bad for you; and Allah knows, while you do not know”(268). Making public interest (maslaha) a proof is not a reference to Allah or to the Messenger, nor is it a judgment by the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) or acceptance of his ruling. And His saying, Exalted is He: “And Allah knows, while you do not know” is a response to those who use public interest (maslaha) as evidence, for He, Exalted is He, says that He alone knows what is in the interest, goodness, justice, guidance, and truth, while they do not know that. Likewise, the saying of the Companion (may Allah be pleased with him) when the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) prohibited him from engaging in contracts of sharecropping or leasing: “The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) prohibited us from something that was beneficial to us, but obeying the Messenger of Allah is more beneficial for us”(269) is a refutation of those who place the Sharia where there is public interest (maslaha).
__________
(263) Al-An'am 57, Yusuf 40, 67.
(264) Al-Hujurat 7.
(265) An-Nisa 59.
(266) Al-Ahzab 36.
(267) An-Nisa 65.
(268) Al-Baqarah 216.
(269) Narrated by al-Bukhari from Rafi' ibn Khadij.
