The Islamic organizations in France (UOIF) published a pamphlet in 2017 that permits interest-based mortgages for French Muslims! This is what is called: a premeditated crime!
Relying on the "objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia)" and evading the legal controls:
For example, the European Council's decision in 2001 states: "If it is impossible to obtain housing through lawful means, and there is a fear of the family becoming homeless or disintegrating, or there is a fear of the children going astray, it is permissible to engage in minor usury to avert these major evils, because preserving religion and honor takes precedence over avoiding usury" (decision number 5/2001, clause 3). The question is: how will preserving religion be achieved through the destruction of the definitive rulings in religion and their permissibility? Has the extrapolation of the objectives of the Sharia overlooked that one of the most significant things that nullifies them is usury and the economic evils it brings to society as a whole? How can we destroy one objective in favor of another? Is Islamic law contradictory, unable to establish its objectives except at the expense of its other objectives? This is a legitimate question! Moreover, they are demolishing a prohibition for which the verses have clarified that its punishment is war from Allah and His Messenger, in favor of "preventing moral deviation," which they have made "preservation of religion"! This indicates the fragility of their understanding of interests and their balancing of them, and the extent to which their fatwas are based on whims and desires rather than on disciplined understanding! Furthermore, the interest in owning housing is an originally legitimate worldly interest that they have permitted after conducting a rational balance between the benefit of owning a house and the harm of usury, favoring the former over the latter, thus prioritizing interests over averting harms! They have made usury a socially acceptable phenomenon under the umbrella of "necessity," claiming that "needs are treated as necessities."
Analysis of the methodology of concession:
An unjustified expansion of the concepts of "necessity" (necessity is measured by its extent) and "need" (which is not equivalent to necessity): The level of social and economic difficulties in the West is raised to the level of "necessity" that permits prohibitions, which is an expansion that violates the strict foundational controls of these concepts, especially in light of the reality that shows that banks do not approve a mortgage purchase contract unless the applicant is financially capable of fulfilling the contract in the foreseeable years. This study provided by the bank undoubtedly proves their ability to rent in the first place, for if they were not capable of renting, which is usually cheaper than the monthly payment for the house they own, they would not approve the contract for them. So where is the need that has been treated as a necessity?
The use of "public interest (maslaha) in an unrestrained manner: The public interest (maslaha) is used in cases that contradict definitive texts, which is rejected by the usul scholars (even those who accept public interest like al-Ghazali and Ibn Qudamah stipulate that it does not oppose the text).
