Ijtihad in the presence of text: The attempt to exercise ijtihad and find loopholes (tricks or false distinctions) in issues where there is a definitive text or consensus, which effectively means disabling the text in practice.
Separating public interest (maslaha) from the controls of revelation: Transforming "public interest" from a legally defined concept based on evidence and the overarching objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) into a purely pragmatic worldly concept, whose main goal is to facilitate life in the Western environment and avoid conflict, even at the expense of the constants of religion.
Western centrality in ijtihad: Making the Western reality and its values (individualism, absolute integration, secularism) the primary driving force and main determinant of the direction of ijtihad, instead of making the legal texts and principles the criteria by which reality is evaluated and solutions are prepared within its limits.
Ibn al-Qayyim says: "The public interest that is not acknowledged by the Sharia as worthy of consideration is not a public interest" (I'lam al-Muwaqqi'in). These fatwas have made "desire" (owning a luxurious house) equivalent to "necessity"!
Contradiction with consensus: The definitive consensus on the prohibition of usury (ribā) (Ibn Abd al-Barr: al-Tamhid 4/60).
The scholar Ibn Taymiyyah: "Definitive texts are not abrogated merely by public interest" (al-Fatawa 20/58).
The European Council for Fatwa issued 30% of its decisions based on the invocation of "necessity" to permit prohibitions (Statistics from the Center for Islamic Legislation Studies for the year 2018).
Serious consequences: Al-Azhar University fatwa 2019: "Fatwas for minorities that permit usury weaken the constants and open the door to tampering with the Sharia."
Weak arguments: "Protecting the family from deviation" has no direct relation to owning a home versus continuing to rent, in addition to the responsibility of parents for upbringing! It is not permissible to commit a definitive prohibition, as Allah, Exalted is He, says: ﴾And whoever fears Allah, He will make for him a way out﴿ [al-Talaq 2], and moreover, more than 15 European countries at the time these fatwas were issued provide interest-free financing. Also, the legal necessity is not "social" but rather an individual necessity like eating carrion, and thus the public interest here is limited to individuals, not a general interest, as evidenced by the fact that millions of Muslims in the West refrained from owning homes through usury!
While there has been no detailed legal evidence permitting usury on the grounds of the necessity of not paying high rent, or necessity, they confused true necessity with "social circumstances," which means politicizing rulings and slipping towards desires. This ijtihad has proven to be a dangerous slip, as it opened the door to the proliferation of usurious transactions among Muslims, and the matter expanded from the need for housing to the needs of luxuries! Although they attempted to regulate it with conditions. However, it is an example of how public interest (owning a house) was prioritized over a legally prohibited principle (usury) by interpreting necessity or need. The truth is that many scholars rejected this fatwa and believed that a Muslim can rent and there is no necessity to fall into explicit usury, as the bank that will approve the buyer's ability to own a house will do so after a comprehensive study by the bank that proves their ability, and will...
