He can obtain that approval only if he is financially capable, and thus he is undoubtedly able to continue paying the rent! The result: those who adopted this license expanded over time, until it became a general rule for some: "what is forbidden for minorities becomes permissible if it is difficult for them, in consideration of public interest (maslaha)!" This is a dangerous confusion and deviation.
Secondly: Changing the rulings of zakat
The issued fatwa: It is permissible to give zakat to Western countries (to fund their public projects) instead of giving it to poor Muslims.
Source: Decision of the European Council for Fatwa (No. 12/2003):
"It is permissible to allocate zakat to Western countries to fund social services (schools, hospitals) that benefit Muslims, as an alternative to giving it directly to the poor."
Contradiction with definitive texts:
The Exalted's saying: ﴾Indeed, the charities are for the poor and the needy ...﴿ (al-Tawbah: 60) - a clear text specifying the recipients.
Consensus: It is not permissible to allocate zakat to anyone other than the eight categories (Ibn al-Mundhir: Consensus, p. 51).
Mechanism of distortion:
Transforming "rational interest" (improving the image of Muslims) into a "necessity" that permits changing the recipients of zakat!
Thirdly: Equality in inheritance between male and female
The issued fatwa: It is permissible to divide the inheritance equally between men and women in the West!
Source: "Seminar on the Jurisprudence of Minorities" (Paris, 2019) sponsored by the Union of Islamic Organizations in France (UOIF):
"If inheriting a female half of a male leads to family disputes or distorts the image of Islam, it is permissible to equalize between them."
Contradiction with definitive texts:
The Exalted's saying: ﴾Allah instructs you concerning your children: for the male, the equivalent of the share of two females﴿ (al-Nisā’: 11) - a text with definitive meaning.
Consensus: One of the greatest sins is changing the shares of inheritance (al-Nawawi: Al-Majmu, 16/34).
Mechanism of distortion:
Considering "social interest" (avoiding criticism from the West) as a justification for abrogating a Qur'anic ruling!
Fourthly: Same-sex marriage (LGBTQ+)
The issued fatwa: It is permissible for a Muslim to officiate same-sex marriages in Western churches!
Source: "Islamic Society of North America" (ISNA) in a workshop in 2022:
