From the judgments of ignorance, participating in the political system that produces this judgment and empowers it is participation in its glorification and acceptance, while the believer is commanded to reject it and disbelieve in it.
And Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾And He shares His judgment with no one﴿ [al-Kahf: 26]. The point of evidence: Allah, Exalted is He, has emphatically denied that anyone should share with Him in His judgment, and whoever participates in electing a human legislator, or in a system that makes legislation the prerogative of parliament, has made a partner for Allah in a right that is exclusive to Him, and this is the essence of shirk (associating partners with Allah) in governance.
Indeed, Allah has even prohibited obedience to human legislators in permitting the forbidden and forbidding the permissible, as He said: ﴾O you who have believed, do not follow the steps of Satan. And whoever follows the steps of Satan, then indeed, he commands what is fasha (immoral) and what is munkar (unrighteous)﴿ [an-Nur: 21]. What about one who empowers a secular legislator to enact laws that permit wrongdoing and obligate people to it in the name of civil law? Is this not one of the greatest forms of following the steps of Satan?!
Allah has linked faith with referring to His law alone, as He said: ﴾But no, by your Lord, they will not believe until they make you judge in that over which they dispute among them and then find no discomfort within themselves from what you have judged and accept in full submission﴿ [an-Nisa: 65]. The point of evidence: True faith is not established except by referring to the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) – that is, his Sunnah and Sharia – and referring to others contradicts the essence of faith.
The legal conclusion: Participation in parliamentary elections under systems that make legislation a human right through "the general will" or "the secular constitution" is a form of referring to the tyrant, and indeed, it is empowering him and agreeing to his legislations. It is explicit participation in a system that claims the right to enact laws in place of Allah, and this contradicts the essence of faith, and it may be practical shirk (associating partners with Allah) or greater depending on belief and intentions.
The believer is commanded to disbelieve in the tyrant: ﴾So whoever disbelieves in the tyrant and believes in Allah has grasped the strongest handhold﴿ [al-Baqarah: 256].
Participation in elections means aiding the disbeliever in falsehood.
﴾And do not cooperate in sin and aggression﴿ [al-Ma'idah: 2]. The point of evidence: Elections in the West are based on a legislative democratic foundation, meaning that the participating representative legislates laws and permits the forbidden (fornication, usury, homosexuality...) and suspends the law of Allah. Thus, participating in choosing him or holding a position within it is aiding in sin and legislating other than what Allah has revealed.
Third: Legislation is a right of Allah, and participating in a secular legislative system is an implicit acknowledgment of this right for others besides Allah.
Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾Or do they have partners who have established for them a religion that Allah has not permitted?﴿ [ash-Shura: 21]. The point of evidence: Participation in elections means entering a system that legislates without Allah, or aiding those who do so, and this is precisely what Allah has prohibited and called shirk.
