The text is cold, and among these is al-Tufi the Hanbali(17). The contemporary proponents of the objectives (maqasid) followed him with varying degrees, and they will be the subject of critique, if Allah wills.
Al-Tufi formulated his theory in the early eighth century, and Dr. Muhammad Abu Zahra said about him: "He was a Shiite." The summary of his theory is as follows:
1- The intellect is capable of discerning benefits and harms except in acts of worship, as they are the rights of the legislator.
2- Benefit is a legal proof independent of the text and does not rely on the testimony of the texts for its validity.
3- Abandoning the text is permissible if the intellect perceives a benefit in opposing it, provided that the text is uncertain in its authenticity or meaning(18).
As for the third group - the Malikis and those who agreed with them - they narrowed the scope further. Some of them relied on the notion that the intellect can determine what is good and bad, and that it can perceive benefits in matters of transactions but not in acts of worship. However, the Ash'arites among them held that the determination of good and bad belongs solely to the Sharia, yet they also acknowledged what is known as public interest (maslaha mursala). However, this public interest is not a legal proof in and of itself; rather, the Sharia must testify to the category of this interest, even if it does not testify to its specific instance. If the Sharia does not testify to its category, it is considered an invalid interest and is not permissible.
__________
(17) He is al-Rabi' ibn Sulayman ibn Abdul Karim ibn Said, known as Najm al-Din al-Tufi, from the village of Tuf in the region of Iraq. He was a Hanbali jurist who was accused of Shi'ism and even heresy. He has around forty-two works in the Qur'an, the fundamentals of religion, jurisprudence, and its principles, among his works are Al-Iksir in the Principles of Tafsir and Mi'raj al-Wusul in Usul al-Fiqh. He passed away in the year 716 AH.
(18) See al-Shanqiti (Ahmad ibn Mahmoud ibn Abdul Wahhab), The Appropriate Description of the Law of Judgment, published by the Deanship of Scientific Research, Islamic University of Medina, 1st edition, 1415 AH, pp. 349-350.
