What you do not know) so suffice yourselves with that and be content with it. Let al-Risuni be content with this response as well, and let him not ask Allah why He did such and such. This reasoning from al-Risuni is like one who cites the saying of Noah (peace be upon him), "Indeed, my son is of my family," and seeks intercession for his disbelieving son by permitting intercession and seeking forgiveness for the disbeliever, because Noah, the righteous servant, did that and overlooked Allah's response to him, "Indeed, I advise you not to be among the ignorant." This is one of the most astonishing arguments. Just as the angels, if we assume the validity of their question for the sake of argument, only asked Allah Himself to know His purpose behind the action itself, does al-Risuni ask Allah Himself so that we may be clear about the purpose of legislation? Or do they still say that He did such and such for such and such a purpose based solely on the conjecture that the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said is the most false of statements? From where do we have the right to ask Allah why He did such and such, if this question is valid for us? The answer may be with al-Risuni.

Secondly: As for his citing the words of Abraham (peace be upon him), "Show me how You give life to the dead," I do not see the connection between the question (why did You do such and such) and Abraham's supplication to be shown by his Lord how He gives life to the dead. There is no relevance of this statement to reasoning and questioning the cause at all; rather, it is a legitimate request for Allah to show His servant some of His signs so that he may increase in faith. This is nothing but a supplication for an increase in faith. Even if we concede, for the sake of argument, that this is a question about the cause, as al-Risuni would like to say, then Abraham is asking Allah Himself. So do the proponents of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) ask Allah Himself about His wisdom so that we may be clear about these purposes and causes they speak of? Exalted are You; this is a great slander.
__________
