Thirdly: As for his argument with the words of Mary and Zechariah: {He said, "My Lord, how can I have a boy when old age has certainly overtaken me and my wife is barren?"} 4.
And Mary: {She said, "My Lord, how can I have a child when no man has touched me?"} 5.

Ibn Hazm said (al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa' wa al-Nahl (1/138)):
We say there is no objection in the response of Zechariah and Mary (peace be upon them) to the glad tidings of the Creator, Exalted is He, to them, as is found in your book regarding Moses (peace be upon him), nor is there any denial in the words of Zechariah and Mary (peace be upon them) that He would give them children while they are barren and a virgin. Rather, they only asked to know the means by which the child would come to be, for in the Arabic language, in which the Qur'an was revealed, there is no disagreement that its meaning is "from where." Thus, what we have said is confirmed, that they asked Allah, the Exalted, from where they would have the children, or from which direction would Zechariah marry another woman, or would Mary marry a man, or from His creation, Exalted is He, and His power. Zechariah only asked the verse to demonstrate his truthfulness among his people and so that it would not be thought that they had taken it and claimed it. This is the apparent meaning of the two verses we mentioned from the Qur'an without the need for forced interpretation by transferring words or adding or omitting.
The word "how" has two meanings: the first is "how" and the second is "from where," as is in the verse, and there is a great difference between "from where" and "why." Thus, the question about the manner or source is not what is intended by the prohibition. The companions asked, "You said, 'How is this?'" meaning "From where is this?" And from where did we come? So Allah informed them that they had come from themselves and because of their disobedience: "Say, 'It is from yourselves.'" Thus, the question here is about something they did themselves.
