Sahih al-Bukhari (3/90)
Narrated to us by Sulaiman ibn Harb, he narrated to us from Hammād, from Ayyub, from Nafi, from Ibn Umar (may Allah be pleased with them), from the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) who said: "Your example and the example of the People of the Two Books is like that of a man who hired laborers, and said: 'Who will work for me from dawn until noon for one qirat?' So the Jews worked. Then he said: 'Who will work for me from noon until the time of the afternoon prayer for one qirat?' So the Christians worked. Then he said: 'Who will work for me from the afternoon prayer until the sun sets for two qirats?' So you are they." The Jews and the Christians became angry and said: "Why do we work more and receive less?" He said: "Did I reduce your rights?" They said: "No." He said: "Then that is My favor; I give it to whom I will."
And here, they only asked Allah, Exalted is He, and look at the answer: "That is My favor; I give it to whom I will." So let those who seek objectives (maqasid) be content with this answer. Even if we were to concede that they asked Allah about the motivation behind legislation, let them be satisfied that Allah does what He wills and legislates what He wills.
And there is a distinction between the question of Umm Salama here with "What is wrong with us?" and the question of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) about the reason for legislating the ruling on reconciliation with the polytheists and the response of one who has returned to them. Umar here asked a question that was not appropriate for the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him) himself: "Why did we give in regarding our religion?" He later regretted this deeply and said, "So I acted accordingly." And see how our most knowledgeable one of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) responded. Did he say as the proponents of objectives (maqasid) claim, that He, Exalted is He, legislated this ruling for such and such benefit and for such and such reason? Rather, he said only, "I am the Messenger of Allah, and I do not disobey Him." So let the proponents of objectives be satisfied with this answer and leave the matter to Allah. The entire account of Hudaybiyyah is in Sahih al-Bukhari.
Likewise, look at Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her). Mu'adhah said: I asked Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her) and said: Why does a menstruating woman make up the fasts but not make up the prayers?
She said: "Are you a Harurite?" I replied: "I am not a Harurite. But I ask."
She said: "We would experience that, and we would be commanded to make up the fast (sawm) but not commanded to make up the prayer (salah)."
