(“the sick person’s dislike”) — ‘Iyad said: we have it with the nominative, meaning: this is from him, the dislike of the sick person; and Abu al-Baqa’ said: it is the predicate of an omitted subject, that is, this refusal is dislike. I said: there is no added benefit in it, because what he said is like what ‘Iyad said; and the accusative is also allowed, as the object, that is, because of the sick person’s dislike, and its being in the accusative as a verbal noun is allowed, that is, he disliked it as the sick person dislikes the medicine. His words: (“and I am looking”) is a circumstantial clause. That is: no one will remain except that the medicine is given to him in my presence, while I look at them, as retribution for what they did and a punishment for them for leaving compliance with his prohibition of that. As for the one who did it, it is clear; and as for the one who did not, it is because they neglected to forbid what he had forbidden them. His words: (“for he did not witness you”) that is, he was not present with you when the medicine was given; and Maymuna, the Mother of the Believers, was with them and was also given it, since she was fasting, to fulfil the oath of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him.))
It is mentioned in Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by Ibn Battal (8/517)
Al-Muhallab said: As for the hadith of the medicine given by force, it is evidence that people are held to retaliation even for lesser injuries than wounds, because he (peace and blessings be upon him) ordered that retaliation be taken for him against whoever had given it to him during his illness and pained him, and this is less than a wound, with no intent to harm. It also shows retaliation of a man against a woman, since most of the people of the house were women, and it is evidence for taking a group for one person.
Al-Muhallab also said ((Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by Ibn Battal (9/415)
That, since what was done to him was something he had not ordered them to do by way of treatment — indeed he had forbidden it — and he was pained by it severely, he ordered that retaliation be taken from everyone who did it to him. Do you not see his words: no one shall remain in the house except that it is given to him, except al-‘Abbas, for he did not witness you? So he made retaliation obligatory on everyone from the household who gave it to him, and whoever helped in that and saw it, for their going against his prohibition, peace be upon him. And this meaning has come in the report of Ibn Ishaq from al-Zuhri, from
