The hadith"(228).
And the researcher mentions here, if Allah wills, the legal evidence for the invalidation of this doctrine:
First: Allah, Exalted is He, said: “O you who have believed, do not put [yourselves] before Allah and His Messenger. And fear Allah; indeed, Allah is Hearing and Knowing”(229). Al-Tabari said: “Do not hasten to decide a matter in your wars or your religion before Allah and His Messenger have decided it for you, lest you decide contrary to the command of Allah and the command of His Messenger”(230). This verse indicates the prohibition of speaking on any issue without legal evidence from the Book or the Sunnah, and it does not command returning to what the people see as beneficial.
Second: Allah, Exalted is He, said: “And do not pursue that of which you have no knowledge. Indeed, the hearing, the sight, and the heart - about all those [organs] one will be questioned”(231). The one who claims that Allah, Exalted is He, left the matter to whatever His servants see as beneficial is a speaker and follower of that which he has no knowledge of, but rather it is mere conjecture.
Third: Allah, Exalted is He, said: “Say, ‘Indeed, my Lord has forbidden immoralities, what is apparent of them and what is concealed, and sin and oppression without right, and that you associate with Allah that for which He has not sent down any authority, and that you say about Allah that which you do not know’”(232). This is similar to the previous one, and anyone who claims that Allah intended such and such without evidence is speaking about Allah that which he does not know.
Fourth: “This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My favor upon you and have chosen for you Islam as religion”(233). This verse
__________
(228) Al-Bukhari, Sahih, previous reference, hadith number (5143).
(229) Surah Al-Hujurat, verse: 1.
(230) Al-Tabari, Tafsir, previous reference, vol. 22, p. 272.
(231) Surah Al-Isra, verse: 36.
(232) Surah Al-A'raf, verse: 33.
(233) Surah Al-Ma'idah, verse 3.
