The verses: such as {And Allah created you and what you do}(20), and the hadiths like "and you believe in destiny, both good and bad"(21) and others, because the affirmation of destiny (qadar) for them and the affirmation of the creation of the actions of the servants, in their view, leads to attributing injustice to Allah, Exalted is He, which is not acceptable in our minds. Therefore, the Mu'tazila first asserted the reasoning behind the actions of Allah and that the actions of Allah must have a cause, and this cause, in their view, necessitates that Allah legislate these rulings, and these rulings are understood by reason to be good and the opposite of them to be bad from the outset. These rulings must, without a doubt, be in the interest of the servant, and reason is capable of discerning their goodness and the badness of their opposites even before the arrival of the Sharia. Therefore, in their view, the one who commits a sin before the arrival of the Sharia is held accountable because his reason is capable of discerning good and bad even if the Sharia does not address it.
Ibn Hazm responded to this group that claims that Allah does not act or intend anything except what is best for the servant, saying in "Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa' wa al-Nahl" (3/29):
Abu Muhammad said: As for those who advocate for the better among the Mu'tazila, they have stopped here and said, "We do not know the meaning of misguidance, nor the meaning of sealing upon their hearts, nor the sealing upon them." Some of them said that the meaning of this is that Allah, Exalted is He, has called them misguided and judged that they are misguided. Others said that the meaning of "He misled them" is that He destroyed them, as you say, "I lost my camel." And all of this is mere claims without evidence.
Abu Muhammad said, "We did not find any original interpretation for them in the words of Allah, Exalted is He, recounting about Moses (peace be upon him) that he said, {It is only a trial by which You lead astray whom You will}."
__________
(20) Surah As-Saffat, verse: 96.
(21) Muslim (Ibn al-Hajjaj Abu al-Hasan al-Qushayri), Sahih Muslim, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut, no date, hadith number 8.
