Public interest (maslaha) is the purpose of Allah and His intent and wisdom behind legislating that ruling.
Al-Amidi said: "They differed regarding the permissibility of the cause in the original meaning as a mere indicator, and the preferred view is that the cause in the original must be understood as a motivator, meaning it must include a valid wisdom that is intended by the legislator in legislating the ruling; otherwise, if it were a mere descriptive attribute without any wisdom, but merely an indicator, then reasoning with it in the original is impossible"(247).
Al-Amidi defined wisdom as (the intended purpose of legislating the ruling) (248), and thus, whatever is intended by the legislator, or the wisdom, or the objective, all of this falls under the concept of purpose according to Ibn Hazm, referring to His purpose, Exalted is He, in legislating the ruling.
They differed regarding Allah's purpose in legislation; some defined it, such as Dr. Ahmed Raissouni, as (the goals for which the Sharia was established to achieve the benefit of the servants) (249).
To this definition and similar ones, the majority who discuss the objectives today adhere, and they mean by public interest a description of an action that generally or mostly brings about goodness or benefit for the public or individuals (250). They mean by interests here what people consider to be beneficial; thus, the legislator's intent or purpose is to achieve what people perceive as beneficial. Sheikh Muhammad al-Tahir ibn Ashour says: "The examination of many evidences from the Qur'an and authentic Sunnah necessitates certainty that the rulings of Islamic Sharia are contingent upon judgments and causes that relate to the general welfare."
__________
(247) Al-Amidi (Ali ibn Muhammad), Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, Beirut, Lebanon, 1st edition, 1404 AH, vol. 3, p. 224.
(248) Al-Amidi, the previous reference, vol. 2, p. 224.
(249) Raissouni (Ahmed), The Theory of Objectives According to Imam al-Shatibi, p. 19.
(250) Taha (Hamdi Subh), Objectives and Goals, Proceedings of the 22nd General Conference, p. 28.
