Abu Muhammad said, "This is indeed misguidance, and it is that they are driven by stubbornness and blindness to adhere to a principle that has become corrupt and to imitate those among their ancestors who have no good in them, while claiming that they do not know what misguidance and sealing mean."

Abu Muhammad said, "The majority of the Mu'tazila have gone astray in a section of predestination (qadar) far removed from the truth. They all said, except for Darar ibn Amr, Hafs al-Fard, and Bishr ibn al-Mu'tamir, and a few who followed them, that there is nothing with Allah, Exalted is He, that is better than what He has given to all people, whether they are disbelievers or believers, nor is there guidance with Him that is better than what He has guided the disbeliever and the believer with; this is equal. And that He is not capable of anything that is better than what He has done for the disbelievers and the believers. Then these people differed; their majority said that He, Exalted is He, is capable of similar acts of goodness without end, while the lesser among them, who are the worshippers and those who agree with them, said this is false because it is not permissible for Allah, Exalted is He, to leave anything He is capable of in terms of goodness due to His actions for the goodness of others. Their argument in this disbelief that they have brought forth is that if He had something better or more excellent than what He has done for the people and withheld it from them, He would be miserly and unjust towards them. And if He were to give something of His grace to some people and not to others, He would be favoring one group over another and unjust, and favoritism is oppression. And if He had what the disbelievers could believe in when He gave it to them and then withheld it from them, He would be unjust towards them to the utmost degree. They said, 'And we know that if a person were to possess great wealth that he does not need and a poor neighbor of his, to whom charity is permissible, were to ask him for a dirham to sustain himself, and he knows his poverty and that he could save his life with it, and he withholds it from him, it would not be for any reason other than that he is miserly. They said, 'If he knew that by giving him the dirham it would ease for him the burdens he has to carry, and he withheld it from him, he would be miserly and unjust.'"
