He said: "If it is accepted that the purpose of the Sharia (law) is for the interests of the servants, then it returns to them according to the command of the Legislator and within the limits He has set, not according to their whims and desires. Therefore, the legal obligations are burdensome on the soul"(257). He said: "The wisdom of the All-Wise Expert has decreed that the establishment of religion and the world is only achieved and sustained through motivations from within the human being that drive him to acquire what he needs for himself and others. He created in him the desire for food and drink when he feels hunger and thirst to motivate him to seek to fulfill this need as much as he can. Likewise, He created in him the desire for women to motivate him to acquire the means that lead to them"(258). Then he said: "If Allah had willed, He could have imposed this obligation while disregarding the desires, or He could have imposed it while removing the innate motivations. However, He has bestowed upon His servants what serves as a means to cultivate this world for the Hereafter and made the acquisition of these desires permissible, not prohibited, but within legal frameworks that are more beneficial and enduring than what the servant considers to be beneficial"(259).
From this text, it also becomes clear what al-Shatibi intended in his book by repeatedly using the term "interests of the servants," which refers to the commands of the Legislator. However, these commands do not prevent the servants from obtaining what they desire, but their acquisition is not unrestricted; rather, it is constrained by limits set by the Legislator. This is a mercy from Allah towards them, for if He had willed, He would not have done so. These constraints imposed by the commands and prohibitions are the true interests, not what the servant perceives as beneficial.
He also says: "The interests that are legislated and the evils that are repelled are only considered in terms of establishing worldly life for the sake of the Hereafter, not in terms of the whims of souls in seeking their ordinary interests or repelling their ordinary evils. The evidence for this includes: the first: (And if the truth had followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and whoever is in them would have been corrupted)"(260).
__________
(257) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 294.
(258) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 303.
(259) The previous reference, same page.
(260) Surah Al-Mu'minun, verse: 71.
