The second: what has preceded in meaning is that the benefits obtained by the accountable person (mukallaf) are usually mixed with harms, just as harms are surrounded by benefits. As we say, souls are sacred, preserved, and sought to be revived, such that if the matter comes down to reviving them or destroying wealth upon them, reviving them is preferable. If reviving them opposes the destruction of religion, then reviving religion is preferable even if it leads to their destruction, as in the case of fighting the disbelievers and killing the apostate, and so on. Similarly, if the revival of one soul opposes the destruction of many souls in a conflict, for example, then reviving the many souls is preferable. Likewise, when we say that eating and drinking revives souls and has apparent benefits, even though it involves many hardships and pains in obtaining it initially, in its use at the moment, and in its necessities and consequences ultimately. Nevertheless, what is considered is the greater matter, which is the aspect of benefit that is the foundation of both religion and worldly affairs, not according to the whims of souls(261).
This text is clear and evident, refuting what the false claimants assert, that the Sharia is merely based on what people perceive as beneficial. There is no doubt that every person seeks only their own desires and what they believe to be in their best interest. The verse has rejected this notion, stating that the truth is not in following whims, but rather the truth is only in what Allah has revealed, not in what people think is beneficial.
Then he said: "Just as hardship can be worldly, it can also be otherworldly. If engaging in actions leads to neglecting a duty or committing a prohibited act, then it is considered a greater hardship in terms of the Sharia than the worldly hardship that does not compromise the religion. The consideration of religion takes precedence over the consideration of the self and others in the view of the Sharia."(262)
This text is very important in interpreting al-Shatibi's concept of the removal of hardship (raf' al-haraj) and the concept of difficulty (mashaqa) according to al-Shatibi.
__________
(261) Al-Shatibi, the previous reference, vol. 2, p. 64.
(262) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 265.
