And it leads to a usual hardship in such matters in this world.
He says, "The legal objective (maqasid al-sharia) of establishing the Sharia is to remove the obligated person from the call of their desires so that they become a servant of Allah by choice, just as they are a servant of Allah by compulsion"(265). The evidence for this consists of several matters: the first is the explicit text indicating that the servants were created to worship Allah and to submit to His commands and prohibitions, as His saying: {And I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me} (51:56) {I do not want from them any provision, nor do I want them to feed Me}(266)... And His saying: {And command your family to pray and be steadfast therein. We do not ask you for provision; We provide for you}(267). And His saying: {O mankind, worship your Lord, who created you and those before you, that you may become righteous}(268)... and other verses commanding worship in general and its details in particular, all of which refer back to returning to Allah in all circumstances and submitting to His rulings at all times, which is the meaning of worshiping Allah... The second is what indicates the blame for opposing this objective, starting with the prohibition against disobeying Allah's command and the condemnation of those who turn away from Allah... The root of this is following desires and yielding to the obedience of immediate interests and fleeting pleasures... The third is what is known through experiences and customs that religious and worldly interests cannot be achieved while indulging in following desires and pursuing interests"(269).
He says, "Indeed, Allah has made following desires opposed to the truth and has made it its counterpart... He has confined the matter to two things: revelation, which is the Sharia, and desires, with no third option. If that is the case, then they are opposites, and when the truth is determined in revelation, it turns to the opposite of desires... All of this is clear in that the intention of the Legislator is to move away from following desires and to enter into
__________
(265) Al-Shatibi, the previous reference, vol. 2, p. 289.
(266) Surah Adh-Dhariyat, verses 56, 57.
(267) Surah Taha, verse 132.
(268) Surah Al-Baqarah, verse 21.
(269) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 292.
