Under the worship of the Lord"(270).
He says: "The answer is that the establishment of the Sharia (law) is, if it is accepted that it is for the interests of the servants, returning to them according to the command of the legislator and within the limits he has set, not according to their whims and desires. Hence, the legal obligations are burdensome on the souls... The commands and prohibitions divert him from the inclinations of his nature and the pursuit of his desires until he takes them from beneath the lawful limit, and this is precisely the intended meaning, which is in direct opposition to whims and desires. As for the fact that the interests of the obligation return to the obligated in this world and the Hereafter, that is correct, and it does not necessitate that attaining them is outside the limits of the Sharia, nor that he can attain them by himself without the Sharia providing them to him, which is evident. This clarifies that there is no contradiction between this statement and what has preceded, because what has preceded considered the establishment of benefit and interest as affirmed by the legislator, not as dictated by whim and desire"(271).
This text clearly illustrates al-Shatibi's (may Allah have mercy on him) intention regarding interest (maslaha), for not everything that people consider to be an interest is indeed an interest; rather, everything that the legislator has commanded is an interest in the religion of the obligated and in their worldly affairs, and all of it is ease, and all of it has no hardship in it, even if at times the obligated may perceive hardship and toil and difficulty in it.
He also said: "The legal objectives (maqasid) are of two types: original objectives and secondary objectives. As for the original objectives, they are those in which there is no benefit for the obligated"(272). He said: "As for the secondary objectives, they are those in which the benefit of the obligated has been taken into account, and from them he attains what he is naturally inclined to in pursuing desires and enjoying the permissible and fulfilling needs"(273).
__________
(270) Al-Shatibi, the previous reference, vol. 2, p. 291.
(271) The previous reference, p. 295.
(272) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 300.
(273) The previous reference, vol. 2, p. 303.
