The truth about the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) is that it is merely a definition of one type of them. If we wanted a definition that encompasses everything that falls under the term objectives of the Sharia, we would say that the objectives of the Sharia are: "what the legislator (al-shari) intended to achieve through the rulings or a group of them." I said "what the legislator intended" so that the definition includes everything the legislator intended through legislation, whether it is benefits for the obligated (mukallaf) or not, such as trials (ibtila). I did not say "its attainment for the people," but rather I said "its attainment" alone so that the definition includes what was intended by the legislation to be achieved for them, such as benefits and trials, or what is to be achieved from them, such as compliance and understanding. The term "rulings" refers to the very texts that include obligations, recommendations, prohibitions, dislikes, and permissions, as is the terminology of the jurists, along with what is related to them from causes, conditions, and impediments (276).
This statement is very important and necessary to correct people's understanding of the objectives that al-Shatibi referred to. Unfortunately, most contemporary scholars have reduced the concept of objectives to just one type, leading many people to believe that the concept of objectives according to al-Shatibi is what they refer to. They even state in their writings about the objectives in their books or articles that one of the first to consider the objectives was al-Shatibi, while al-Shatibi is innocent of their claim, as has been clarified. It is unclear whether this oversight is due to ignorance or ill intent. This has resulted in widespread corruption and statements that have no basis in divine authority, which are in clear contradiction to the Sharia. These individuals did not limit themselves to the types of objectives mentioned by previous scholars, but they also spoke of what they called the renewal of objectives, thus they began to derive new objectives for Allah, Exalted is He, as if the best generations were unaware of this goodness that others have reached through their derivation of Allah's intent and purpose. They do not realize that they are attributing negligence to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), claiming that he knew those objectives of Allah for which they alter the rulings, yet he did not convey them to us despite their importance until these individuals came and discovered them. They criticize the earlier scholars for their lack of interest in extracting what they termed the general objectives (277). Thus, they invalidated the punishment for apostasy by what they called the objective of freedom of belief, and they permitted women to marry themselves in violation of the hadith: "There is no marriage except with a guardian" (278), claiming the objective of the leniency of the Sharia in changing rulings due to changing customs. They also permitted women to lengthen their hair and to use dental embellishment in violation of the hadith: "Allah has cursed those who lengthen their hair and those who create gaps in their teeth for beauty" (279), for the same previous objective. Moreover, they even permitted explicit usury with the wealthy under the guise of development and investment, claiming that the objective of the Sharia is to guide creation morally and educationally, and that there is no contradiction between this and lending to the wealthy with interest. Thus, they interpret the texts prohibiting usury under this overarching objective, limiting its prohibition to the poor only (280). There is no power and no strength except with Allah.
__________
(276) Taha (Hamdi Subh), The Objectives and Goals, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second General Conference, p. 7, 8.
(277) Awda (Jaser), The Concept of Legal Objectives and Their Role in the Field of Ijtihad, Publications of the American Open University, p. 47.
(278) Abu Dawood, Sunan. 1785.
(279) Muslim, 3966.
(280) Jabir (Hassan), Fields of Objectives in Development, Publications of the American Open University, p. 99.
