What meaning and what righteousness is there in the creation of Iblis and the devils, and in granting them the power to mislead people, from the wisdom that is known among us? By necessity, we know that whoever sets traps for people in the roads and places thorns in their paths is indeed a blameworthy fool in our view. And Allah, Exalted is He, created all that we have mentioned with their acknowledgment, and He is the Wise, the All-Knowing. Then we find that He, Exalted is He, bore witness to those who pledged allegiance under the tree, that He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility upon them. Then He caused some of them to die quickly who were in charge of the affairs of the Muslims, and weakened some of them, and over them ruled Ziyad and al-Hajjaj and the rebels of the Khawarij. So what benefit is there in this for al-Hajjaj and for Qatari or for the rest of the Muslims if the Mu'tazila had understood? But the truth is our statement, which is that all of this is justice from Allah, truth, and wisdom, and destruction and ruin and misguidance for the tyrannical al-Hajjaj and Qatari and their likes. Allah, Exalted is He, intended thereby their destruction in the Hereafter, and we seek refuge with Allah from being forsaken. Then we ask them, what do you say if Allah, Mighty and Majestic, commands the flogging of the free woman for adultery and the flogging of the slave woman half of that? Is this not favoritism towards the slave woman? And when Allah, Mighty and Majestic, grants a people abundant wealth, and they act corruptly with it, while depriving others, is this not the very essence of favoritism and injustice against their corrupt principle? In the case of one who prevents his poor neighbor, unless they expel their claim, they will resort to the statement of those who mentioned that it is obligatory to treat people equally in wealth and women. In general, the people deny the resemblance and disbelieve in whoever likens Allah, Exalted is He, to His creation. Yet we do not know anyone more resembling Allah, Exalted is He, to His creation than they do. They impose the ruling upon Him and apply commands and prohibitions to Him, and they liken Him to His creation in what is good and what is evil. Then they contradicted their principles, as from their statement that what is good among us in one way or another, we do not distance it from the Creator, Exalted is He. And we find among us those who favor their servants over others, making one of them in charge of his wealth and family, and a guardian for his child, and he accepts him for this from his childhood by teaching him reading and writing.
