And he makes the other one a rider for his mount and a collector of dung for his garden and a cleaner for his yard, and he chooses him for that from his youth. Likewise, the female slaves, he makes one of them the place for his garment and a caretaker for his child, and he makes the second one a servant to the first in cooking and washing. This is just, by the consensus of all Muslims, and they did not deny that the Creator, Exalted is He, may favor whom He wills among His servants with what He loves of preference.
And we say to them also, whatever is better for everyone, especially for the people of the Fire, is that Allah, Exalted is He, creates us all in Paradise as He did with the angels and the houris, or what He has done with us by creating us in this world and exposing us to trials in it and to eternal life in the Fire. (Abu Muhammad said) They insisted on this, so some of them said that Paradise has not yet been created. We said to them, suppose that the matter is as you say, then it would be better for everyone that Allah, Mighty and Majestic, hastens its creation, and then creates us in it, or delays our creation.
until He creates it, then He creates us from it. Or did He create him for us where He created us? If they are unable to comprehend their Lord, they make Him one with limited power and similar to His creation, and they nullify His divinity, making Him confined and weak. And this is pure disbelief. Moreover, the denial of the question also leads them to think that He would make us like the angels and that He would make us all prophets, as He did with Jesus and John (peace be upon them) and all the other prophets (peace and blessings be upon them). Some of them said, "Our ignorance of the aspect of benefit in this does not take this matter out of wisdom." We said to them, "Be satisfied with this very point." For who told you that our ignorance of the aspect of benefit and wisdom in Allah, Exalted is He, creating His servants' actions and in His commanding the disbeliever and the sinner to do what they cannot bear, then punishing them for that, is what takes it out of wisdom? And there is no escape for them from this. (Abu Muhammad said) And as for...
