We do not accept this, but rather what we are ignorant of; however, we affirm that all that Allah, Exalted is He, does is indeed wisdom and justice. Whoever wishes to subject His actions to the wisdom and justice known to us has indeed deviated and likened Allah, Exalted is He, to His creation, for the wisdom and justice known to us are solely obedience to Allah, Exalted is He. There is no wisdom or justice other than that which He has commanded us, whatever it may be. As for Allah, Exalted is He, there is no obedience to anyone over Him; thus, it is invalid for His actions to be in accordance with the commands of the servants who are ordered, created, and accountable for what they do. Rather, His actions, Exalted is He, are in accordance with might, power, dominion, grandeur, and submission to Him, and He is not to be questioned about what He does, nor is there any more to say, as He, Exalted is He, has said: "And he has failed who opposes what Allah, Exalted is He, has said." Despite all this, they have not escaped the necessity of returning to the obligation of distortion and folly regarding their principles about their Lord, Exalted is He. Their theologians said: "If we were created in Paradise, we would not know the extent of the blessing upon us therein, and we would also not be deserving of that blessing due to any action we performed." And admitting us into Paradise after our deserving it would be more complete in blessing and more profound in pleasure. Also, if we were created in Paradise, it would be necessary to threaten us regarding what is prohibited to us, and Paradise is not a place of threats. Furthermore, Allah, Exalted is He, knew that some of them would disbelieve, so it would be necessary for them to exit Paradise. (Abu Muhammad said) This is all that they could muster of foolishness, and all of this returns to them by the power of Allah, Exalted is He, and His strength and assistance to us. We say, and with Allah, Exalted is He, is success. As for their statement: "If we were created in Paradise, we would not know the extent of the blessing upon us therein," we say, and with Allah, Exalted is He, we are supported: Could Allah, Exalted is He, not create us therein and create within us the strength and nature by which we would know the extent of the blessing upon us therein more than we know it after entering it on the Day of Resurrection? Or was He incapable of that? If they say He was incapable of that, they have incapacitated their Lord, Exalted is He, and made His power finite.
