He is capable of our matter and not capable of anything else, and this can only be due to an internal condition or a finite power. This is pure disbelief, and even if they say that Allah is capable of that, they acknowledge that He, Exalted is He, did not do what is best for them and that what is with Him is better than what He has done to them. Also, if they intended by that that pleasure follows hardship and toil with greater joy and more profound delight, they must negate the blessings of Paradise entirely, because its bliss is not at all mixed with pain or toil, and every pain after the experience of it is forgotten, as the poet said... "The young man was never concerned when he was clothed."
And it has never been the case that when He bestows something...
It is necessary, based on this principle, that Allah, Exalted is He, specifies for the people of Paradise what is in it, so that their existence of pleasure may be renewed. This is a departure from Islam, and it also necessitates that the prophets and the righteous enter the Fire and then be brought out of it to Paradise, thus multiplying the pleasure and joy many times over. They will be told, "We used to be like the angels and the houris." If they were aware of the extent of the bliss and pleasure they are in, then we were like that as well. And if they were unaware of the extent of the pleasure and bliss they are in, then why did He not grant them this benefit? And for what reason did He deny them this virtue that He granted us, while they are the people of His obedience that has not been tainted by disobedience? If they say that the angels and the houris have witnessed the punishment of the disbelievers in the Fire, and thus they have a position of intimidation, we say to them: Is favoritism and injustice not that He exposes a people to destruction and keeps them until they disbelieve, so they remain eternally in the Fire to serve as a warning to another people created in Paradise and eternal comfort? Is this not the essence of injustice? This is what we have established based on the principles of the Mu'tazila. And like the one who says among the tyrants, "The third is killed in the righteousness of the two-thirds." Is there any greater absurdity and folly than the absurdity of one who says to another, "Here, let me strike you with whips, throw you from a mountain, slap you on the back of your neck, and pull your hair"?
