And fasting, if it were only known to be a grave sin by the prohibition, would imply that the meaning of the statement is that Allah does not command what He forbids, and the grave sin here is their circumambulating the House naked"(40).
(Reply) First, it is not established that the intended meaning is the circumambulation of the House naked. Al-Baghawi said, "Ibn Abbas and Mujahid said: It is their circumambulation of the House naked, and 'Ata said: It is polytheism"(41). Al-Baydawi said, "And if they commit a grave sin: it is an act that is extreme in its ugliness, like idol worship and exposing one's nakedness during circumambulation"(42). They were prohibited from polytheism because they had been addressed about it since the religion of Ibrahim (peace be upon him), and Allah has ruled it to be a grave sin. Even if that were the intended meaning, what prevents Allah, Exalted is He, from ruling certain things to be sinful and then not commanding them? The meaning would be that Allah does not command what He has decreed to be sinful. They ask here about the ruling of one who marries his sister: is it a grave sin or not? If they say yes, it can be said: That was permissible in the Sharia of Adam (peace be upon him) and was not a grave sin at that time, but it has become a grave sin in our Sharia. Allah rules as He wills, and may Allah grant success.
3- They cited the saying of Allah, Exalted is He: “He commands them with what is good and forbids them from what is evil”(43), and the saying of Allah, Exalted is He: “And He makes lawful for them the good things and prohibits for them the evil things”(44). This group went on to say that what is good was known through reason before Allah commanded it, and likewise, what is evil was known to be evil before Allah forbade it.
__________
(40) Rabi'a (Abdul Aziz bin Abdullah), Knowledge of the Objectives of the Sharia, previous reference,
(41) Al-Baghawi (Al-Husayn bin Mas'ud bin Muhammad), Ma'alim al-Tanzil in the Interpretation of the Qur'an, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, 1st ed., 1420 AH, vol. 2, p. 186.
(42) Al-Baydawi (Anwar al-Tanzil wa Asrar al-Tawil), Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, no edition, 1418 AH, vol. 3, p. 15.
(43) Surah Al-A'raf, verse 157.
(44) Surah Al-A'raf, verse 157.
