Legislation is part of the examination, for actions do not have a characteristic either before the law or by the law. As for the philosophers and the majority, they have established the three categories, which is correct"(47).
From the previous words of Ibn Taymiyyah, it becomes clear from the second section that there are actions that acquire the name of goodness (hasan) by being commanded, and thus they contain benefit (maslaha), whether worldly or otherworldly. And there are actions that acquire the name of evil (qabih) from God's prohibition, and thus their performance is the evil, and consequently, they contain corruption (mafsada). The apparent meaning of his words
- May Allah have mercy on him - that it acquires this even if people think otherwise. This is clearly illustrated by his statement in his discussion on public interests (masalih mursala), where he said:
This is an important section that deserves attention, for it has caused great confusion in the religion. Many rulers, scholars, and worshippers have seen interests (masalih) and acted upon them based on this principle, and some of these may be prohibited in the Sharia (law) without their knowledge. They may also prioritize interests that contradict the texts, and many of them have neglected interests that must be considered according to the Sharia, believing that the Sharia did not address them, thus missing out on obligations and recommended acts or falling into prohibitions and disliked actions. It may be that the Sharia did address these matters, but they were unaware of it. The argument for the first position is that this is an interest, and the Sharia does not neglect interests; indeed, the Qur'an, the Sunnah (traditions), and consensus (ijma) have indicated their consideration. The argument for the second position is that this is a matter for which the Sharia has not provided a text or analogy. The assertion of unregulated interests (masalih mursala) establishes something in the religion that Allah has not permitted, and it resembles, in some respects, the issue of juristic preference (istihsan), rational improvement (tahsin), and opinion (ra'y), and so forth. Juristic preference seeks the good and the better, akin to extraction; it is the perception of something as good, just as the perception of something as bad is termed aversion (istiqbah). Goodness is the interest, so juristic preference and interest-seeking are closely related, and rational improvement is the claim that reason...
__________
(47) Majmu' al-Fatawa, previous reference, vol. 5, p. 43.
