The good is recognized, but there are differences between these, and the comprehensive statement is that the Sharia (Islamic law) never neglects any benefit (maslaha) at all. However, what the mind believes to be a benefit, even if the Sharia did not intend it, one of two things must be the case: either the Sharia indicated it in a way that this observer was unaware of, or it is not a benefit even if it is believed to be so, because the benefit is the advantage that is obtained or predominant. Many people often mistakenly think that something is beneficial in religion and worldly matters, while it may have a lesser benefit accompanied by harm, as Allah, Exalted is He, said about wine and gambling, “Say, ‘In them is great sin and [yet, some] benefit for people. But their sin is greater than their benefit.’” {Qur'an 2:219}. Much of what people have innovated in beliefs and actions, from the innovations of the people of rhetoric, the people of Sufism, the people of opinion, and the people of kingship, they have considered to be a benefit or a good that is correct and right, while it is not so. Indeed, many of those who have deviated from Islam, including Jews, Christians, polytheists, Sabians, and Magians, many of them think that what they hold in terms of beliefs, transactions, and acts of worship is a benefit for them in religion and worldly matters. Their efforts have gone astray in this worldly life while they think that they are doing well. {Qur'an 18:104}. Their evil deeds have been made to seem good to them. Thus, if a person sees as good what is actually bad, their approval or acceptance of it may fall into this category(48).
Therefore, he (may Allah have mercy on him) has brought closer the view of the majority of the Ahl al-Sunnah (People of the Sunnah) on this issue, and that the final reference is only to the Sharia, even if one thinks that the benefit is otherwise. This is what the researcher seeks to prove, and this refutes the claims of the Mu'tazila, al-Tufi, and the Malikis. However, Ibn Taymiyyah mentioned a third category: that of an action that appears to be harmful and ugly, and he exemplified it with the killing of the Prophet Ibrahim (peace be upon him) of his obedient son Isma'il (peace be upon him). However, he said that this may have been...
__________
(48) Ibn Taymiyyah (Ahmad ibn Abdul Halim), Majmu' al-Rasa'il wa al-Masa'il, Arab Heritage Committee, vol. 5, pp. 23, 24.
