In these verses, there is evidence that the very command to kill themselves is intended, and this, according to those who advocate for the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), contradicts the definitive objective of preserving life. However, Allah condemned them for not complying with the command and for viewing it as repugnant. Al-Qurtubi reported that Abu Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him) said: "If this were written, I would have begun with myself and my family"(52). Thus, the intention behind Allah's command is not understood at all; is it a test, or is it rational for us? Even according to the opinion of the majority, based on that, there must be compliance in all circumstances, and may Allah grant success.
The destruction of the issue of rational preference (istihsan)
Ibn Hazm (may Allah have mercy on him) says: "If you dispute over something, refer it to Allah and the Messenger if you believe in Allah and the Last Day; that is better and a more favorable conclusion" (53). He did not say, "Refer it to what you find preferable." It is impossible for the truth to lie in what we find preferable without evidence, for if that were the case, Allah would be commanding us to do what we cannot bear, and the truths would be nullified, the proofs would contradict each other, and the arguments would oppose one another. Allah would be commanding us to differ, which is impossible, for it is not permissible at all for all scholars to agree on one opinion while differing in their aspirations, natures, and interests. We find that the Hanafis have preferred what the Malikis have deemed reprehensible, and we find that the Malikis have preferred an opinion that the Hanafis have deemed reprehensible. Thus, it is invalid for the truth in the religion of Allah, the Exalted, to be referred to the preferences of some people. They have argued for preference with a saying that circulates on their tongues, which is: "What he saw."
__________
(52) Al-Qurtubi (Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abu Bakr), Ahkam al-Qur'an, Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyya, Cairo, 2nd ed., 1384 AH, 1964 CE, vol. 5, p. 70.
(53) Surah An-Nisa: 59.
