Muslims have said, "What some of them see as good is good" (54), and we do not know of this being attributed to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) from any source at all. If this had come from a correct source, they would have no basis for it, because it would only establish the consensus of the Muslims, as it does not say, "What some Muslims see as good is good," but rather, "What Muslims see"—this is the consensus that cannot be contradicted. Then they are asked, what do you mean by your statement of istihsan (juridical preference) in this matter? Their answer to this is one of two responses: one is what they were upon in the time close to Abu Hanifa and Malik, which they see as more cautious, or lighter, or closer to custom and tradition, or further from disgrace. All of this, in general, returns to what their souls find pleasing, and this is invalidated by His saying, "And as for he who fears the position of his Lord and prohibits the soul from [following] desire, then indeed, Paradise will be [his] refuge" (55). "Indeed, the soul is ever inclined to evil, except those upon which my Lord has mercy" (56). "So if they do not respond to you, then know that they are only following their desires. And who is more astray than one who follows his desire without guidance from Allah?" (57). This verse refutes the idea that anyone should follow what they find pleasing without evidence(58).
He says, "That reason does not necessitate anything nor does it deem anything good or bad, and the proof of this is that all people of reason, except for a few, are followers of laws, and the laws have come with killing, taking property, striking a person, and slaughtering animals. Never have the people of reason said that these laws contradict what is in reason, and only the least of people have claimed that."
__________
(54)
(55) An-Nazi'at: 40
(56) Yusuf: 53
(57) Al-Qasas: 50
(58) Ibn Hazm (Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa'id), Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, Beirut, no date, vol. 6, pp. 16-19.
