His intellect is a measure against the intellect of others, and if this were a requirement for intellects, all people of intellect would possess it, as they say they are equal, equal. Thus, it is established that their claim regarding intellects is false in the realm of good and evil in general(59).
There is no doubt that the first sin that occurred after the creation of Adam was rooted in an intellectual repulsion. This is because when Iblis was commanded to prostrate to Adam (peace be upon him), he found that command repugnant. Ibn Kathir says, "And Iblis (may Allah curse him) said, 'I am better than him' (60), which is an excuse that is greater than the sin, as if he refrained from obedience because the superior should not be commanded to prostrate to the inferior. He means (may Allah curse him): 'I am better than him, so how can You command me to prostrate to him?' Then he clarified that he was better than him because he was created from fire, and fire is more noble than what You created him from, which is clay. The accursed one looked at the origin of the element and did not consider the honor and exaltation, which is that Allah, Exalted is He, created Adam with His own hand and breathed into him from His spirit. He made a faulty analogy in opposition to the explicit text of His saying, 'So prostrate to Adam' (61) (62). This repulsion led Iblis to prioritize the analogy he ruled over Allah, Exalted is He, believing it did not contradict the explicit text, and Allah is the One whose help is sought.
Abu Muhammad said, "Muslims have known that Allah, Exalted is He, is just and does not oppress or wrong. Whoever describes Him, Exalted is He, with oppression and wrongdoing is a disbeliever. However, this is not as the ignorant think, that their intellects judge Allah, Exalted is He, in that He should only do what their intellects deem good and that He should be deemed to do what their intellects deem evil. This is merely likening Allah, Exalted is He, to His creation. The truth is that everything Allah, Exalted is He, does, whatever it may be, is from Him, Exalted is He.
__________
(59) Ibn Hazm (Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa'id), Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa' wa al-Nahl, Al-Khanji Library, Cairo, undated, vol. 5, p. 80.
(60) Surah Al-A'raf: 12.
(61) Surah Al-Hijr: 29.
(62) The appropriate description of the ruling Sharia, previous reference, p. 36.
