It was permissible for him to do all that he mentioned he obligated upon himself, and if he obligated that upon himself after it was not obligatory upon him, it is possible for him to lift that obligation from himself. Thus, the invalidity of what they interpret regarding the saying of Allah, Exalted is He, {and it was a right upon Us to aid the believers} (64) and His saying {He has decreed upon Himself mercy} (65) becomes apparent. All of this is merely that Allah, Exalted is He, decreed it and made it a necessity, and since it is a right, that obligation is from Him, not upon Him. Therefore, I replaced (min) with (ala), and prepositions can be exchanged for one another. (66)
The types of ugliness they mentioned and the response to them:
"They said: And it is always ugly to do to others what you do not want done to yourself, and to impose what cannot be borne and then punish for it. Abu Muhammad said: These deluded ones, when they brought forth this foolishness, thought they had made a profound point, while in reality, they have babbled and wasted their words. This is a clear error, and some of this type is ugly because Allah, Exalted is He, deemed it ugly, and some of it is good because Allah, Exalted is He, deemed it good. It is astonishing that they boast in their claim that favoritism among us is injustice, and we do not know in which law or in which reason they found that favoritism is injustice, while Allah, Exalted is He, has permitted it except where He wills. This is because a man may marry two, three, or four wives, and this is permissible and good for him... whereas it is not permissible for a woman to marry more than one nor to have a slave. This is good from Him, and we know by necessity that in their hearts there is jealousy just as in our hearts. Likewise, we find that Allah, Exalted is He, has given the eldest son two shares of the inheritance even if he is wealthy and self-sufficient, while He has given the daughter one share even if she is young and poor. Thus, the claim of the Mu'tazila is invalid, and it is established that Allah, Exalted is He, shows favoritism."
__________
(64) Surah Ar-Rum: 47.
(65) Surah Al-An'am: 53.
(66) Ibn Hazm (Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa'id), Al-Fasl fi Al-Milal wal-Ahwa' wal-Nihal, Al-Khanji Library, Cairo, no date, vol. 3, p. 8059.
