Whoever He wills, He allows, and whoever He wills, He prevents; and this is justice. As for imposing what is beyond one's capacity and punishing for it, this is deemed reprehensible among us only because Allah, Exalted is He, has prohibited that for us(67).
What Ibn Hazm (may Allah have mercy on him) held is supported by what Imam Ahmad narrated from Mujahid, who said: I entered upon Ibn Abbas and said, "O Abu Abbas, I was with Ibn Umar and he recited this verse and wept." I asked, "Which verse?" He said, "And if you disclose what is in yourselves or conceal it, Allah will bring you to account for it"(68). Ibn Abbas said: When this verse was revealed, it greatly distressed the companions of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) and caused them intense anger. They said, "O Messenger of Allah, we are doomed, for if we are held accountable for what we say and what we do, as for our hearts, they are not in our control." The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said to them, "Say, 'We hear and we obey.'" He said: Then this verse abrogated it: "The Messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord, and [so have] the believers"(69), up to "Allah does not burden a soul beyond that it can bear; it will have [the consequence of] what [good] it has gained, and it will bear [the consequence of] what [evil] it has earned." Thus, they were excused for their inner thoughts and acted upon their deeds"(70).
In the hadith, the obligation of what cannot be borne, which is the essence of what is deemed reprehensible by these individuals, was not met with the response of the companions (may Allah be pleased with them) saying, "We heard and disobeyed," but rather they said, "We heard and obeyed," even if the obligation contradicted what they believed to be the dictates of reason. This hadith refutes every argument made by those who prioritize public interest (maslaha) over textual evidence and judge by their intellect on
__________
(67) The previous source, vol. 3, p. 61.
(68) Surah Al-Baqarah: 284.
(69) Surah Al-Baqarah, verse 285.
(70) Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, Dar Al-Risalah, 1st ed., 1421 AH - 2001 CE, hadith no. (3070), its verifier stated that its chain is authentic according to the conditions of the two shaykhs.
