Texts of the Sharia.
"And some of the Mu'tazila said that it is always reprehensible and prohibited, and it is indeed a form of disbelief in the favor of the Benefactor and disobedience to the father. Abu Muhammad said: This is the height of error, for the rational person, when he reflects, knows with certainty that there is no benefactor except Allah alone, without partner. It is not obligatory to thank a benefactor unless Allah, Exalted is He, makes it obligatory. A small child may suckle from a goat, yet he does not owe any right to it because Allah, Exalted is He, did not make it for him but made it for the parents, even if they are disbelievers or insane, and they did not take care of our upbringing but were preoccupied with their own pleasures. Here, there is only the command of Allah, Exalted is He. Another proof is that if a man has intercourse with a woman, knowing that it is prohibited or not knowing, yet he is someone from whom a child cannot be attributed due to the sperm that comes from that act, then his rights do not apply to that child at all. There is no difference in reason, and in birth, the fetus is born from the sperm of the one who has intercourse with its mother, whether it is from our legitimate children or from children born out of wedlock."(71)
"And some of them said that lying is reprehensible in every case. Abu Muhammad said: This is like the first case, and they have all agreed with us on the invalidity of this statement and on the permissibility of lying in five situations, as Allah, Exalted is He, has made it permissible. This includes a Muslim who is hiding from a tyrannical imam who is oppressing him and seeking him. If that tyrant asks the one who is hiding about the one he is seeking... there is no disagreement among any of the Muslims that if he tells the truth and guides him to his location and his wealth, he is disobedient to Allah, the Almighty, and a wicked oppressor, committing a reprehensible act. But if he lies and says, 'I do not know his location or the location of his wealth,' then he is rewarded and is doing good."
Then Ibn Hazm referred to the hadith of Umm Kulthum bint 'Uqba, who said: "I did not hear the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) permit anything of lying except in three cases, and the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) would say, 'I do not consider him a liar.'"
__________
(71) Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, the previous reference, vol. 3, p. 62.
