"The man reconciles between people, speaks the truth, and intends nothing but what is best; and the man speaks in war, and the traveler speaks to his wife, and the woman speaks to her husband"(72).
"And some have said: Oppression is ugly. Abu Muhammad said, 'This is like the first, and we ask them what the meaning of oppression is, and they can only say that it is killing people, taking their wealth, harming them, killing oneself, or disfiguring oneself, or permitting others to marry one's relatives. None of this is ugly in itself. Indeed, Allah, Exalted is He, has permitted taking the wealth of a people in Khurasan because of a cousin who mistakenly killed a man in Andalusia. We find that He, Exalted is He, has permitted the blood of one who commits adultery while being married, even if he has never had relations with any woman except for an old, ugly wife, whom he had relations with once before she died, and he finds no means to marry or take a concubine while he is a young man in need of women. And He has prohibited the blood of an old man who committed adultery, even though he has a hundred beautiful maidens like stars, but he has never had a wife. As for a man killing himself, Allah, Exalted is He, has made it good for a person to expose himself to being killed in His cause, and the shock of the crowds that he is certain will kill him in that act. And He, Exalted is He, commanded those before us to kill themselves, as He said: {So turn to your Creator and kill yourselves} (73). As for disfiguring oneself, circumcision, entering into the state of ihram, bowing, and prostrating, if it were not for Allah, Exalted is He, commanding this and beautifying it, it would have no meaning"(74).
He said regarding marriage: "As for witnessing a man marrying their daughters to men, then the man among them divorces the woman, then another man, and so on as much as they can. Likewise, if he dies, what difference is there in minds between permitting relations with her by the word...
__________
(72) Abu Dawood (Sulaiman ibn al-Ash'ath al-Sijistani), Sunan Abu Dawood, Al-Maktabah Al-Asriyah, Sidon, Beirut, Hadith No. (4921), authenticated by Al-Albani: Sahih.
(73) Surah Al-Baqarah: 54.
(74) Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa' wa al-Nahl, previous reference, vol. 3, pp. 203-204.
