They found that Allah, Exalted is He, mentioned a reason for legislating this ruling or that, and they extended this to other rulings, until they made His intention, Exalted is He, necessarily consistent in everything they believed resembled this ruling among the rulings. And when authentic texts from the Sunnah contradicted what they arrived at, they rejected those texts on the pretext that they were of ambiguous indication, and they prioritized what they called the intention of the legislator. Allah, Exalted is He, said regarding the prohibited things, “And do not say about Allah that which you do not know” { وَأَن تَقُولُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ }(6). They prioritize what they call the intention of the legislator over the legal ruling because that is established for them through induction, and induction for them is definitive, so the definitive takes precedence over the ambiguous, which is the hadith of the individual narrators. Thus, this was proclaimed and seized by some contemporary scholars, some of whom are well-intentioned, and some of whom are ill-intentioned, seeking to undermine the texts, and indeed to dismantle the entire Sharia.
This is because they deduced general objectives, claiming things like “removing hardship” and “wherever there is benefit, there is the legislation of Allah.” They took these principles and similar ones, and they applied them to the legal texts, nullifying and tearing apart their words and meanings. Then they began to compare that to what is good and bad for a servant, so they made it obligatory upon Allah, Exalted is He, what they made obligatory upon the servant, and they prohibited Him from what they prohibited for the servant, calling that justice and wisdom, while their intellects are incapable of comprehending His wisdom and justice(7). They sometimes refer to this as benefit and at other times as preference.
(The term “objectives” began to resonate in various scientific, economic, and political circles, adopting the legal objectives.)
__________
(6) Surah Al-A'raf, verse 33
(7) Ibn Taymiyyah (Ahmad ibn Abdul-Halim), Majmu' al-Fatawa, King Fahd Complex, Medina, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, no edition, 1416 AH - 1995 CE, vol. 8, p. 91.
