فاستهدوني أهدكم) (83).
So, I affirm misguidance in everything except through the guidance of Allah, Exalted is He, and there is no specification for that. I affirm that whoever follows their desires without guidance from Allah is the most misguided of the misguided, and that the truth is not followed by the desires of any person. These verses and hadith are general, and specifying them without a specification is an act of injustice and a diversion of these texts from their apparent meanings. Every opponent of the truth is pleased with their knowledge and intellect; if the truth were left to the whims of these people, the religion would be lost and obliterated. Allah, Exalted is He, says, “So when their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they rejoiced in what they had of knowledge, and there engulfed them what they used to ridicule” { فَلَمَّا جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَرِحُوا بِمَا عِنْدَهُم مِّنَ العِلْمِ وَحَاقَ بِهِم مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ } (84). Al-Zamakhshari says, “Among them are those who refer to the knowledge of the philosophers and the materialists from the Greeks, who, when they heard of the revelation from Allah, rejected it and belittled the knowledge of the prophets. It is said that Socrates heard of Moses (peace and blessings be upon him) and was told, ‘If you were to migrate to him,’ he replied, ‘We are a refined people, so we have no need for someone to refine us’”(85).
This is the same statement of this group, but they limited it to transactions only, meaning al-Tufi and those who agreed with him, while the secularists and liberals extended it to everything. There is no power and no strength except with Allah.
Secondly: His (peace and blessings be upon him) saying, “There is no harm and no reciprocating harm”(86). Al-Albani said after mentioning the chains of this hadith, and among them is a chain that includes the anachronism of Ibn Ishaq, and a chain that he said is a sound mursal, “These are many chains for the hadith that exceed ten, and although the individual narrations are weak, many of them do not have severe weakness, so if
__________
(83) Sahih Muslim, previous reference, hadith number 2577.
(84) Surah Ghafir, verse 83.
(85) Al-Zamakhshari (Mahmoud bin Amr bin Ahmad), Al-Kashaf 'an Haqaiq Ghawamid al-Tanzil, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, Beirut, 3rd ed., 1907, vol. 4, p. 182.
(86) Al-Albani (Muhammad Nasir al-Din), narrated by al-Khalil in the verification of the hadiths of Manar al-Sabil, Islamic Office, Beirut, 2nd ed., 1405 AH-1985 CE, vol. 3, p. 413.
