And among them is what al-Bukhari also narrated from Amr ibn Maimun, who said: "I witnessed Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) praying the Fajr (dawn) prayer in congregation, then he stood and said: 'The polytheists used to not pour out until the sun rises, and they would say, "Shine, Thubir." And the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) opposed them and poured out before the sun rose'."(100)
Likewise, the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) abandoned the desires of his people for the truth in his marriage to his son's wife, and Allah, Exalted is He, said to him: {And when you said to the one upon whom Allah had bestowed favor and you had bestowed favor, "Keep your wife and fear Allah," while you conceal within yourself that which Allah will make evident, and you fear the people, while Allah has more right that you fear Him}(101). Thus, the fear of people does not prevent one from speaking the obligatory truth unless a greater corruption is feared than that corruption. And what indicates that this was not an obligatory matter is what Ibn Abd al-Barr narrated, that after Ibn al-Zubair rebuilt the Kaaba on the foundations of Ibrahim, al-Hajjaj demolished it and rebuilt it as it was in the days of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him). Then "Harun al-Rashid mentioned to Malik ibn Anas that he wanted to demolish what al-Hajjaj had built of the Kaaba and return it to the construction of Ibn al-Zubair, based on what was narrated about the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him). Ibn al-Zubair complied, and Malik said to him: 'I beseech you by Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, do not make this house a playground for kings; for if any of them wishes, he would demolish the house and rebuild it, and its reverence would vanish from the hearts'."(102)
If Malik had seen it as obligatory, he would not have left it. Thus, the evidence is not suitable for the inference of al-Tufi, and it is not permissible to abandon the obligatory except for necessity, as will come, if Allah wills, and necessity is to be measured by its extent, and the obligatory ruling is not to be abandoned for everything that people see as beneficial.
Secondly: That the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) leaving this action and affirming the house as it was is also a text, for his affirmation
__________
(100) The previous reference, hadith number (1664).
(101) Surah Al-Ahzab, verse: 37.
(102) Ibn Abd al-Barr (Yusuf ibn Abd Allah ibn Muhammad), Al-Istidhkar, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, Beirut, 1st ed., 1421-2000, vol. 4, p. 188.
