After them in this matter, whoever claims that the proof in the religion of Allah, Exalted is He, is established without the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger, and what refers back to them, has spoken about the religion of Allah with what has not been established, and has affirmed in this Sharia a ruling that Allah did not command, and this is a grave matter." This opinion has been attributed to the majority(110).
The opponents of this view have generally cited several evidences that suggest the validity of relying on the statement or action of a companion. Those who hold this opinion believe that the action of the companion here is to be followed in the specific issue that contradicts the apparent text because he informed of the intention of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) regarding this apparent text(111). However, it is noteworthy that those who advocate for prioritizing public interest (maslaha) over the text believe that they first justify the action or statement of the companion by claiming that he did it solely for the sake of public interest, and no companion has ever stated or uttered that he contradicted the text in his action because he saw it as more beneficial for the people, or because what he deemed to be in the public interest contradicted the text. These individuals have deduced a rationale for the action or statement of the companion, and then they used this deduced rationale as evidence, applying it across all branches of Sharia. Glory be to my Lord, the Exalted, how can the statement and action of the companion, which the majority agree is not a proof, be used as evidence for something that is presumed to have been done for that reason? This is a presumption based on a presumption, and indeed, presumption does not avail against the truth at all.
Evidences of those who argue with the statements and actions of the companions:
First: What has been narrated from the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) that he said, "My companions are like the stars; whichever of them you follow, you will be guided." He said
__________
(110) Al-Shawkani (Muhammad ibn Ali), Irshad al-Fuhul ila Tahqiq al-Haqq min Ilm al-Usul, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, 1st ed. 1319-1999, vol. 2, pp. 182-188.
(111) The same reference, vol. 1, p. 162.
