Said ibn al-Musayyib said: "Ali and Uthman (may Allah be pleased with them) met at Asfan, and Uthman was forbidding temporary marriage (mut'a) or Umrah. Ali said, 'What do you want with something that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) did and you are forbidding it?' Uthman replied, 'Leave me alone.' He said, 'I cannot leave you alone.' When Ali saw that, he called both of them to perform the pilgrimage."(121) Al-Qasim ibn Salam added, "Uthman said, 'Do you see me forbidding the people while you do it?' He replied, 'I would not abandon the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) for the statement of anyone among the people.'"(122) Thus, we learned that the Sunnah of Ali is to prioritize the text over the statement or action of the caliphs. Al-San'ani says, "The sixth: Among the evidence of the followers is the hadith, 'Upon you is my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the rightly guided caliphs after me, Abu Bakr and Umar. Follow their guidance and hold fast to the covenant of Ibn Umm Abd.' The response is that following them means adhering to the Book and the Sunnah, accepting what is in them, calling to them, and prohibiting imitation, as nothing has been reported from them in this regard. It has been authentically reported from Ibn Mas'ud, who is Ibn Umm Abd, that he prohibited imitation and said, 'A man should not be an imitator without insight.' It is well known that none of them abandoned the Sunnah for the statement of any speaker. Furthermore, the Sunnah of the rightly guided caliphs and their method is to follow the Book and the Sunnah; thus, adhering to their Sunnah is following the prophetic Sunnah and the Qur'an."(123)
Thirdly: They said that the companions (may Allah be pleased with them) witnessed the revelation, so they are more knowledgeable about what they witnessed, and praise has come upon them.
(Response): Ibn Hazm said, "The obligation of praising them does not necessitate that they be imitated, as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) mentioned...
__________
(121) Muslim (Ibn al-Hajjaj al-Naysaburi), Sahih Muslim, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, Beirut, no date, hadith number 1223.
(122) Al-Adawi (Abu Ubaid al-Qasim ibn Salam), Al-Nasikh wa al-Mansukh fi al-Qur'an al-Aziz, Maktabat al-Rushd, Riyadh 1418 AH, hadith number (338).
(123) Al-San'ani (Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Salah), Irshad al-Nuqad ila Taysir al-Ijtihad, Dar al-Salafiya, Kuwait, 1st ed., 1405 AH, vol. 1, p. 166.
