It remains permissible based on its original ruling, so he (may Allah be pleased with him) did not contradict the text at all, and this is a means to facilitate acts of worship, and it is not an independent act of worship introduced by Abu Bakr. The evidence for writing is what Zaid ibn Thabit said: "I gathered the Qur'an entirely from palm fronds, pieces of leather, and the chests of men"(140). He compiled that into a single mushaf not as legislation for what Allah did not permit. Rather, it is a means to facilitate worship, like using an airplane for traveling to Hajj, or using television and tapes for calling to Islam, and so on, and Allah knows best.
Thirdly: They cited Umar's collection of the kharaj (tax), and this was not done by the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) with the People of the Covenant (dhimmi), as it is not permissible for Umar to take the kharaj from the trade of the People of the Covenant in the land of Islam, because they are only liable for the jizyah (poll tax).
(Response): Umar did not do this in contradiction to a text, as it is merely a rental contract, where the people of war pay a fee for their trade, or a reward that the people of war established for the Muslims in exchange for selling their goods in the lands of Muslims. Both contracts are permissible under their conditions in the Sunnah. So where is Umar's prioritization of public interest (maslaha) over the text concerning the people of war? Moreover, the wealth of the combatants is originally lawful for Muslims, as Allah, Exalted is He, said: "And know that whatever you obtain of war booty, then indeed, for Allah is one fifth of it" { وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ }(141), and the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "And the war booty has been made lawful for me" (142). So if Umar took a fifth from the Muslims, where is this in prioritizing public interest over the text? As for the People of the Covenant, it is because they were agreed upon in their covenant that he had made with them in the treaty, as Abdul Razzaq narrated in his Musannaf: "Amr ibn Shu'ayb said: The people of Manbij and those beyond the sea of Aden wrote to Umar ibn al-Khattab offering to enter...
__________
(140) Al-Ihkam fi al-Ahkam, previous reference, vol. 6, p. 111
(141) Surah Al-Anfal, verse 41.
(142) Muslim, previous reference, (810).
