It was not to be taken from one who had not contracted for it. (And from Masruq, he said: "By Allah, there is no action that I fear will lead me to the Fire more than this action of yours, and it is not that I fear that I have wronged a Muslim or a protected person (dhimmi) out of a dinar or a dirham, but I do not know what this rope is that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) did not establish, nor did Abu Bakr or Umar." Abu Muhammad said: "It is clear that it is an innovation (bid'ah) and it is not permissible to think that Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) exceeded what was in their contract, just as it is not permissible to think that he would take from the Muslims one dirham for every forty dirhams, when it is less than two hundred dirhams. And with Allah's help is success.)(145)
From what has been mentioned, it is clear that Umar used to take zakat from the Muslim, and from the dhimmi who had contracted for an increase over the jizyah, he would take the increase, while from one who had not contracted for it, he would take nothing. And from the people of war, he would take one-tenth. And with Allah's help is success. Thus, it is invalid to claim that he contradicted a foundational text, because it is permissible to make a settlement for wealth upon conquest above the jizyah based on the text, and it is permissible to deal with the people of war through leasing or a reward and to impose a fee on them for entering the lands of the Muslims, so there is no text that prohibits this fundamentally, until it is said that Umar contradicted it for the sake of public interest (maslaha). And with Allah's help is success.
Fourth: They cited the abrogation by Umar of the share for those whose hearts are to be reconciled (muallafatu qulubuhum)(146), saying that he abandoned the text for the sake of public interest, as the public interest is the benefit of the remaining categories, and the text is: "Indeed, the alms are for the poor and the needy and those who collect them and those whose hearts are to be reconciled."(147)
__________
(145) Ibn Hazm (Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa'id), al-Muhalli bil-Athar, Dar al-Dhikr, Beirut, undated, vol. 4, p. 237.
(146) An Introductory Study on Maqasid for Ijtihad, reference Jasaq, p. 58.
(147) Surah At-Tawbah, verse 60.
