2- It was narrated from Umar that he said, "If I live until next year, I will not open a village except that I will divide it as the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) divided Khaybar." This is a return from Umar to the division.
3- It was reported from Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) that he pleased the souls of the conquerors after the conquest, and this is permissible. It was narrated from Qais ibn Hazim that he said, "Bajila constituted a quarter of the people on the day of Qadisiyyah, so Umar allocated to them a quarter of the spoils. They received it for two or three years. Then Ammar ibn Yasir came to Umar ibn al-Khattab with Jarir ibn Abdullah. Umar said: 'O Jarir, were it not that I am responsible for the division, you would have received what was allocated to you. I see that the people have increased, so I think it should be returned to them.' Jarir did that. Then Umm Kuraz al-Bajiliyah said: 'O Commander of the Faithful, my father has died and his share is fixed in the spoils, and I have not converted to Islam.' Umar said to her: 'O Umm Kuraz, your people have done what you know.' She replied: 'If they have done what they have done, then I will not convert to Islam until you carry me on a gentle she-camel adorned with a red cloak and fill my hands with gold.' Umar did that, and the gold amounted to about eighty dinars. This is the most authentic report about Umar in this regard, and it is our opinion, for he did not stop until he pleased the souls of those present, and he inherited from those who died among them, and this is what should not be thought of Umar otherwise."(151)
Sixth: They argued that Umar contradicted the text "There is no zakat on a Muslim for his servant or his horse"(152) which is agreed upon for the public interest, as Al-Bayhaqi narrated from Ya'la ibn Umayyah who said, "Abdur-Rahman ibn Abi Umayyah, the brother of Ya'la, bought a female horse from a man for one hundred camels, but the seller regretted it. He came to Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) and said: 'Ya'la and his brother have taken my horse by force.' So Umar wrote to Ya'la ibn Umayyah to come to me." He came to him and informed him, and Umar said: "Indeed, horses reach this."
__________
(151) See al-Mahalli, previous reference, vol. 5, p. 412.
(152) Bukhari (1463), and Muslim, Zakat/10.
And Sunan al-Tirmidhi, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi Library, Egypt, 2nd ed., 1395 AH - 1975 CE, (628).
