It is obligatory, from Nabil ibn Awf who said that Umar ibn al-Khattab commanded the people to give charity, so the people said, "O Commander of the Faithful, we have horses and slaves, impose upon us ten for ten." Umar replied, "As for me, I will not impose that upon you"(157). Thus, it is confirmed that Umar did not impose as he promised, may Allah have mercy on him, and this is the assumption regarding Umar (may Allah be pleased with him), and thus it was only a recommendation from him and a voluntary act from them.
Then Ali opposed Umar after that—if he indeed imposed it—and said, "I have forgiven the charity on horses and slaves"(158). Ali followed the text, and he is among the rightly guided, so let them follow his Sunnah in adhering to the text, as well as the Sunnah of Abu Bakr due to Umar's earlier statement, "What my two companions did before me." So what made Umar's action, if it is correct that he did it as an obligation, a proof, while the actions of Abu Bakr and Ali are not proofs, even though they are included in the hadith? And may Allah grant success.
Seventh: They said: Umar contradicted the text of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) in which he said, "Whoever kills a person, his spoils belong to him"(159), and Umar contradicted him by taking a fifth of the spoils of the marzuban's horse for the public interest (maslaha) since the spoils were significant(160).
(Response): By presenting the hadith of Umar, the story becomes clear, with the permission of Allah. Al-Bayhaqi narrated from Anas ibn Malik that the first spoils to be divided in Islam were those of Al-Bara' ibn Malik, who charged at the marzuban and stabbed him, killing him. His companions dispersed from him, so he descended to him and took his belt and bracelets. When he returned, Umar ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) walked until he reached Abu Talha al-Ansari (may Allah be pleased with him) and said, "O Abu Talha, we used to not take a fifth of the spoils, even if the spoils of Al-Bara' ibn
__________
(157) Al-Mahalli, previous reference, vol. 4, p. 34.
(158) Previous reference, same page.
(159) Sahih Bukhari, previous reference, hadith number (3142).
(160) See Awda (Jasir), Introduction to Maqasidi for Ijtihad, previous reference, p. 57.
