Malik has wealth, and I am the fifth, so establish the area and the two bracelets for thirty thousand."(161) Ibn Hazm used this as evidence.
The narration of the action of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him):
The first narration: Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) perhaps saw that if the spoils were significant, then the imam has the right to divide it into five parts, which is the position of Ishaq ibn Rahawayh (may Allah have mercy on him)(162).
The following hadith refers to this:
From Awf ibn Malik, he said: "I went out with those who went out with Zayd ibn Harithah in the Battle of Mu'tah, and I was accompanied by reinforcements from Yemen. In one narration, a man from Hamir (who was the reinforcements) killed a man from the enemy and wanted to take his spoils, but Khalid ibn al-Walid, who was their commander, prevented him. So Awf ibn Malik went to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) and informed him. He said to Khalid, 'What prevented you from giving him his spoils?' He said, 'I thought it was too much, O Messenger of Allah.' He said, 'Then let him have it.' So Khalid passed by Awf, pulled his cloak, and said: 'Have I fulfilled for you what I mentioned to you from the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him)?' The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) heard him and became angry and said, 'Do not give it to him, O Khalid, do not give it to him, O Khalid. Will you leave my commanders to me...'"(163)(164)
Here, the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) permitted the action of Khalid, and this is perhaps due to the fact that the wealth was abundant, as Khalid informed.
__________
(161) Al-Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra, previous reference, hadith number (12787).
(162) The Kuwaiti Jurisprudence Encyclopedia, Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs, Kuwait, Dar al-Safwa Press, Egypt, edition from (1404-1427 AH), vol. 25, p. 183.
(163) (*) Al-Madadi: This means a man from the reinforcements who came to support Mu'tah and assist them.
(164) Sahih Muslim, previous reference, hadith number (1753, 1754).
