A worldly interest that returns to him, the author also stated that the Sharia (law) has objectives (maqasid) for the servants, which are for the servants to understand the texts of this Sharia and to act according to them to the best of their ability. Al-Shatibi added that all those obligated (mukallafun) fall under it, meaning as determined by Allah, not according to whims, as explained by Professor Abdullah Daraz. It is noted from this definition that it encompasses everything that Allah intended to be achieved through the rulings, and the intention may simply be a test. Allah, Exalted is He, said, “That He may test you which of you is best in deed” { لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً } (13). According to this definition, there is no need to justify the rulings and link them all to what is called the interest of the servant, as the ruling may simply be intended for testing, as previously mentioned. Of course, this is not the aim of most who use the term objectives (maqasid); therefore, the author stated that many have limited its definition to being “what the legislator intended to achieve through the rulings for the servants from interests.” Consequently, they said that everything the legislator intended to achieve through the rulings is in the interest of the servant, and that the primary objective of legislation is the interest of the servant.
Al-Shatibi (may Allah have mercy on him) said, "The purpose of establishing the laws is for the interests of the servants in both this world and the Hereafter, and this is a claim that must be substantiated with proof of its validity and invalidity, and this is not the place for that." (14).
And may Allah have mercy on al-Shatibi, for he described this introduction as a given, and this means that there is no disagreement regarding it. Nevertheless, he felt the need to state, "And this is a claim that must be substantiated with proof, whether it is valid or invalid, and this is not the concern of given matters." Then I do not know what he meant by his statement: "And this is not the appropriate place for that," even though this is the most suitable place for it.(15)
__________
(13) Surah Al-Mulk, verse 2.
(14) Al-Shatibi (Ibrahim ibn Musa ibn Muhammad), Al-Muwafaqat, Dar Ibn Afan, 1st ed., 1417 AH - 1997 CE, vol. 2, p. 9.
(15) Al-Raisuni (Ahmad), The Theory of Objectives of the Sharia (Maqasid al-Sharia) According to Imam al-Shatibi, Dar Al-Ilmiyah for Islamic Books, 1412 AH, 1992 CE, Vol. 1, p. 186.
