The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) did not say to him that this is not permissible, but rather said, "Give it to him," then told him, "Do not give it." This may indicate that if the wealth is abundant, the imam has the choice between giving and returning it, as is evident from the hadith. Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) held this view, and perhaps his justification is the action of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) in this matter, and not public interest (maslaha), as they claimed. It is possible that he (may Allah be pleased with him) understood this interpretation from this hadith, for if giving the spoils were obligatory, the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) would not have neglected it, nor would he have commanded to withhold it from its owner.
The second argument is that Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) may have seen the matter of the spoils as entrusted to the imam, because when the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) ruled the spoils for the killer, he did so as an imam in a discretionary manner, not as a matter of legislation. The Hanafi and Maliki schools hold this view(165)(166).
Ibn Rushd said, "The reason for their disagreement is his (peace and blessings be upon him) statement on the day of Hunayn after the fighting had cooled down, 'Whoever kills a man, his spoils belong to him.' This may have been from him (peace and blessings be upon him) as a discretionary act because it has not been established that he said this (peace and blessings be upon him) or ruled it except on the days of Hunayn, and due to the opposition of the verse on spoils if it is taken to mean entitlement, namely the saying of Allah, Exalted is He, {And know that whatever you obtain of war booty, then indeed, it is for Allah and the Messenger and for [his] near relatives and the orphans, the needy, and the traveler, and if Allah wills, He will forgive you} (167). For when the verse specifies that one-fifth is for Allah, it is understood that four-fifths are obligatory for those who are present(168).
__________
(165) Al-Sarakhsi (Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abi Sahl), Al-Mabsut, Dar Al-Ma'rifah, Beirut, no edition, 1414 AH-1993 CE, vol. 15, p. 47.
(166) See Ibn Rushd (Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad), Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nihayat al-Muqtasid, Dar Al-Hadith, Cairo, no edition, 1425 AH-2004 CE, vol. 2, p. 160.
(167) Surah Al-Anfal, verse: 41.
(168) Ibn Rushd, the previous reference, vol. 2, p. 160.
