Perhaps Umar understood this as well as these individuals did, so where is the contradiction with the text, especially since the previous hadith in Muslim indicates this as well.
The third argument: that Umar found the heart of Al-Barra pleasing. Ibn Hazm said, "It should not be assumed that Umar deliberately opposed the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), for it is established that he found the heart of Al-Barra pleasing, and this is a sound and good point that we do not deny"(169). Ibn Hazm interpreted the hadith that prevented Khalid from giving the spoils to the killer as "in its text, the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) only commanded him not to return it to him, because he knew that the killer was the owner of the spoils who gave it willingly, and Khalid did not demand it from him, and that 'Awf was speaking about something he had no right to, and this is the text of the report"(170).
And Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) did not say that he did this for the sake of public interest (maslaha), so this is a statement made without knowledge, and may Allah be pleased with him be far from opposing the text of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) without interpretation, and may Allah grant success.
Eighth: They cited the hadith of Ibn Abbas who said: "Divorce during the time of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him), Abu Bakr, and two years of Umar's caliphate was three divorces as one. Umar ibn al-Khattab said: The people have hastened in a matter in which they had previously been patient, so if we enforce it upon them, we will enforce it upon them"(171).
They said: With this hadith, Umar has prioritized public interest (maslaha) over the text, and they thought that the public interest was a deterrent for these people, and here Umar has imposed a ruling and a divorce that is not obligatory at all, and he has opposed the text for the sake of public interest.
__________
(169) Ibn Hazm, al-Mahalli, previous reference, vol. 5, pp. 401, 403.
(170) Previous reference, vol. 5, pp. 401, 403.
(171) Sahih Muslim, hadith number (1472), al-Tabarani, (Sulaiman ibn Ahmad ibn Ayyub), al-Mu'jam al-Kabir, Ibn Taymiyyah Library, Cairo, 2nd ed., undated, hadith number (1096).
