It is as if it is attributed to the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him). Some of the companions of Abu Hanifa said it is not like that. We have the argument that the apparent condition of the companions is that they would not undertake any matter of religion while the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) was among them except by his command, so it became as if it were attributed to him. This is because it is only attributed to the time of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) for a benefit, which is to indicate that the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) was aware of it and did not deny it, thus it must be considered as if it were attributed to him. They argued that they used to do things during the time of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) that were not attributed to him. Do you not see that when they disagreed about the meeting of the circumcised, some of them said, "We used to have sexual relations during the time of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) and we would not perform ablution"? Umar said to him, "And the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) knew that and approved of you?" He said, "No." Umar said, "Then what?" And Jabir said, "We used to sell the mothers of children during the time of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him)."(173).
Ibn Hazm said, "As for the hadith of Tawus from Ibn Abbas, which states that the three were one and were returned to the one and made one, there is nothing in it that indicates that he (peace and blessings be upon him) was the one who made them one, or that he (peace and blessings be upon him) was aware of it and approved it. There is no proof except for what is authentically reported that he (peace and blessings be upon him) said, did, or knew, and did not deny."(174)
Perhaps Umar understood this as well, so he exerted himself in the matter because there is no hadith raised to him (peace and blessings be upon him) regarding it. Thus, he did not contradict any text at all, since it was not established for him that the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) was aware of it and approved of it.
Secondly: If it is accepted that it has the ruling of raising (raf') then perhaps what is meant is "repeating the wording as if he says you are divorced, you are divorced,
__________
(173) Al-Shirazi (Ibrahim ibn Ali ibn Yusuf), Al-Tabsirah fi Usul al-Fiqh, Dar al-Fikr, Damascus, 1st ed., 1403 AH, p. 334.
(174) Al-Mahalli, previous reference, vol. 9, p. 392.
