He strived to understand the text and apply it(181).
There is no doubt that the definite singular noun with the article "the" is one of the forms of generality. Ibn Qudamah said about the forms of generality, "The third type: the singular term, such as 'the thief' and 'the female thief,' and 'the fornicator' and 'the female fornicator,' as it is established. It is referred to as the singular noun defined by the non-specific 'the,' and its being one of the forms of generality is the view of al-Shafi'i, Ahmad, Ibn Burhan, Abu al-Tayyib, and al-Buwayti, and al-Amidi transmitted it from most scholars(182). Therefore, based on this, Umar's understanding that lives are taken for lives is indeed an application of the form of generality in the verse.
Tenth: They cited Umar's (may Allah be pleased with him) prohibition of Nasr ibn Hajjaj from going to Basra, as he was handsome, to prevent the temptation of women by him, even though the original principle is that there is no connection to this, and the original ruling is the prohibition of harming a Muslim, due to His saying, "And those who harm believing men and believing women without what they have earned have certainly born upon themselves a slander and a manifest sin" {And those who harm believing men and believing women without what they have earned have certainly borne upon themselves a slander and a manifest sin}(183). Thus, punishment is only applied upon the occurrence of a sin, and Umar's action in this regard contradicts those texts considering the public interest.
(Reply): The hadith was mentioned by al-Khara'iti, and its chain of narration states, "While Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) was in one of the streets of the city, he heard a woman calling out in her chamber and saying:
'Is there a way to wine for me to drink, or is there a way to Nasr ibn Hajjaj?'
Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said: 'I see that Nasr is a man whom the young women call out to in their chambers, regarding Nasr ibn...
__________
(181) The public interest (maslaha mursala), an attempt to elaborate on it and a perspective on it, previous reference, p. 47.
(182) Ibn Qudamah (Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad), The Garden of the Observer and the Paradise of the Viewers, Al-Rayan Foundation, 2nd ed., 1423 AH - 2002 CE, vol. 2, p. 11.
(183) Surah Al-Ahzab, verse 58.
