The same reasoning applies; would Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) take precautions for the women of Medina while leaving the women of Basra to fall into trials, as they claim? Far removed is he from that, and Allah knows best what is correct.
Eleventh: They cited the inclusion of Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) of craftsmen, even though the original principle is that liability does not extend except with evidence. However, when Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) saw the benefit for the people in including them, he prioritized the public interest (maslaha) over the text, which is his saying (peace and blessings be upon him), "But the oath is upon the defendant."(188). The craftsman here is a defendant, and the original principle is that he should not be liable except for transgression, and his oath suffices him when he denies it. Ibn Hazm said, "It is authentically reported through Ibn Abi Shaiba from Hatim ibn Ismail from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from his father that Ali used to hold the tailor and the goldsmith liable, saying, 'The people cannot be rectified except by that.'"(189).
(Response): Imam al-Shafi'i said, "And it may be narrated from a source that the scholars of hadith do not affirm, that Ali ibn Abi Talib (may Allah be pleased with him) held the washer and the dyer liable, saying, 'The people cannot be rectified except by that.' This was reported to us by Ibrahim ibn Abi Yahya from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from his father that Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) said that, and it is also narrated about Umar holding some craftsmen liable from a source weaker than this."(6).
And if the narration from Ali is authentic, it has not been reported from him (may Allah be pleased with him) that he knew the original principle is that craftsmen are not liable in Sharia, then he contradicted that for the sake of public interest (maslaha). Thus, it is not correct to attribute that to him; rather, good opinion of him necessitates that we think he exercised ijtihad in the absence of a text, so it is not correct to speak about anyone without knowledge.
__________
(188) Sahih Muslim, previous reference, hadith number (1711).
(189) Al-Muhalli, previous reference, vol. 7, p. 30.
(6) Al-Shafi'i (Muhammad ibn Idris), Al-Umm, Dar al-Ma'rifah, Beirut, 1393 AH, vol. 7, pp. 96, 97.
