Perhaps al-Shatibi's statement and his summarization of the evidence for the issue led those after him to accept this matter as a given. Consequently, they examined the actions of the servants, and whatever they perceived as beneficial, they claimed that it was from the Law of Allah. They varied between being expansive and restrictive in this regard, as the researcher will clarify, if Allah wills. For al-Shatibi, when he used the term "benefit (maslaha)," he meant— as I will explain in the third section— the benefit for the servant in this world and the Hereafter, and not what they intended by it being everything that the servant believed to be beneficial.
Secondly— why did these people speak of what is called the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia)?
To simplify, why did they say that what Allah, Exalted is He, intended with His legislation of rulings is what His servants see as beneficial for them?
The answer to this question is based on two premises that lead to this conclusion:
First: They said that the concepts of good and evil are only for the intellect. Thus, whatever the intellect perceives as good is good, and whatever it sees as beneficial is the benefit. If the intellect acknowledges that something is a benefit and the textual evidence contradicts that, the intellect takes precedence, and the text is interpreted or deemed weak. This is the doctrine of the Mu'tazila(16).
Second: That Allah, Exalted is He, does not command except what is good in our minds, for the actions of Allah are rationally justified. We examined the Sharia to extract a purpose or intention behind the Sharia and found that this is the benefit of the servant. Therefore, the intention of Allah, Exalted is He, in all His commands is the benefit of the servant, and the intellect must first perceive it as good. The Mu'tazila consistently applied this doctrine in beliefs, acts of worship, and all branches of the Sharia.
Some limited their focus to the realm of actions, excluding beliefs and acts of worship. They examined the texts of the Sharia, whether they were established by conjecture or indication, and whatever contradicted that from their perspective of it being beneficial was rejected.
__________
(16) Rabi'a (Abdul Aziz bin Abdul Rahman), The Science of the Objectives of the Sharia, Islamic Economy and Finance Encyclopedia website.
