Amending, as for Ibn Hibban, he included them according to his principle in "al-Thiqaat" (1/23, 2/63) (203).
And if the narration of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) is authentic, it is understood in the context that the basis of the ruling has not been established as previously mentioned, and success is from Allah, the Exalted. Indeed, Allah, the Exalted, said {So whoever is forced by necessity, neither intending to commit sin nor transgressing, there is no sin upon him}.
{Al-Baqarah: 173}. Ibn Hazm says, "It is not permissible for a Muslim who is forced to eat carrion or pork while he finds food that belongs to a Muslim or a dhimmi, because it is an obligation upon the owner of the food to feed the hungry. If that is the case, then he is not forced to eat carrion or pork, and success is from Allah. He may fight for that, and if he is killed, then the killer is subject to retaliation, and if the one preventing him is killed, then he is under the curse of Allah because he prevented a right and is a rebellious faction" (204). Thus, it is clear from this that there is a right for the poor in the wealth of the rich who has surplus wealth, and if the poor is compelled by hunger to take from it, he is entitled to do so. Whoever takes his right is not a thief, so there is no punishment upon him. This is what Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) understood, and it should not be assumed that he meant by this the abrogation of the punishment for the wealthy who is full. This, if the report is authentic in their understanding, is at most a matter of the ijtihad (independent reasoning) of the Companions, which the researcher has indicated is not authoritative, and success is from Allah, the Exalted.
Thirteenth: They argued with the action of Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) that he prohibited marriage to the People of the Book, for Umar prioritized public interest (maslaha) over the text, and the text is His saying, the Exalted, {This day [all] good foods have been made lawful, and the food of those who were given the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them, and [lawful in marriage] are chaste women from among the believers and chaste women from among those who were given the Scripture before you} (205).
(Reply) First: Umar did not prohibit in the sense of making this act unlawful, but he merely disliked it for them, and this dislike is not.
__________
(203) Al-Albani, Irwa al-Ghalil, previous reference, hadith number 2428.
(204) Al-Mahalli, previous reference, vol. 4, p. 284.
(205) Surah Al-Ma'idah, verse 5.
