Absolute dislike for what is originally permissible, rather what Umar disliked was only out of fear that the condition for the permissibility of marriage with the People of the Book (ahl al-kitab) would not be fulfilled, which is the condition of chastity in His saying, {And the chaste women from among those who were given the Scripture before you} (al-Ma'idah: 5). And Allah, Exalted is He, knows best. The hadith clarifies the intended meaning, which is "that Hudhayfah married a Jewish woman, so Umar wrote to him, 'Release her,' and he wrote back, 'Do you claim she is unlawful, so you want me to release her?' He said, 'I do not claim she is unlawful, but I fear that you will engage with the promiscuous women among them.' This is authentic."(206) Al-Albani said, "The chain is authentic, and it was narrated by al-Bayhaqi, who said: This is from Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) in the manner of disapproval and dislike."(207) What indicates the dislike is that when he was asked, he said, "I do not claim she is unlawful," and likewise "the addition of Abdul Razzaq, he did not divorce her until after that he divorced her."(208) If Hudhayfah believed it was unlawful, he would have hastened to divorce her, and if Umar believed it was obligatory to follow his statement, he would not have approved of Hudhayfah's act of what is unlawful.
It is also well known that if what is lawful is mixed with what is unlawful, some scholars have stated that in this case, it is disliked to engage in what is lawful due to the hadith, "Whoever avoids the doubtful matters has safeguarded his religion and honor." Ibn Battal said, and others stated that the doubts mentioned in this hadith are lawful, as evidenced by his saying (peace be upon him) in it, "Like a shepherd who grazes around the sanctuary," thus making the doubts what is around the sanctuary, and what is around the sanctuary is not the sanctuary itself, indicating that this is lawful, and that leaving it is piety.(209) The mixing of what is lawful with what is unlawful here is the possibility that this woman is among the promiscuous women, and thus she would be
__________
(206) The hadith was narrated by al-Bayhaqi, in al-Sunan al-Kubra, (13984). See also
(207) Al-Albani, Irwa al-Ghalil, previous reference, vol. 6, p. 301.
(208) Abdul Razzaq, al-Musannaf, previous reference, no. (10057).
(209) Ibn Battal (Ali ibn Khalaf ibn Abdul Malik), Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, Al-Rushd Library, Riyadh, 2nd ed., 1423 AH - 2003 CE, vol. 6, p. 193.
