(Al-Radd): They relied on the unqualified texts in which Allah, Exalted is He, did not say, "I did this for such and such reason," and they inferred reasons from them and asked Allah why He did it, responding to themselves without evidence, claiming that Allah did it for our benefit, and they forgot His saying, “He will not be asked about what He does, but they will be asked” { لاَ يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ }(215). If we were to be required to follow this induction they claimed, and this question they asked, then the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) would have clarified that for us, as He said, “So that you may clarify to the people what has been revealed to them” { لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ إِلَيْهِمْ }(216). And he would have asked this same question to the best of generations, who were the most eager for the religion and for understanding it, in order to derive, as they claim, definitive general principles.
Then, after their inference that Allah, Exalted is He, did that for the benefit they mentioned, they also claimed that when Allah did that action for such and such benefit, it must and cannot ever deviate from that in any branch or any individual case of the general rule, ever. This is a right upon Him, Exalted is He, that does not waver or change. We ask them a question: Is it permissible to specify a general rule established by text or not? They all say yes, as the many general texts in the Book and the Sunnah are mostly specified by Him, Exalted is He, to the extent that it was said, “There is no general rule except that it has been specified,” except for His saying, “And Allah is All-Knowing of everything” { وَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ }(217). He permitted sales and prohibited uncertainty, forbade the sale of fresh dates and allowed the sale of dried dates, and Allah, Exalted is He, did not obligate Himself to apply the general rule established by text to all its individuals, but rather He, Exalted is He, excludes what He wills. So why did they not say this regarding the general rule established by their induction, if it is valid to be considered general, that He, Exalted is He, has exceptions as He wills? Perhaps the issue...
__________
(215) Surah Al-Anbiya, verse 23.
(216) Surah An-Nahl, verse 44.
(217) Al-Amidi (Ali ibn Abi Ali ibn Muhammad), Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, Islamic Office, Beirut, Lebanon, vol. 4, p. 281.
